=== ILIAD BOOK 1 ===

The quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles—Achilles withdraws from
the war, and sends his mother Thetis to ask Jove to help the Trojans—Scene
between Jove and Juno on Olympus.



Sing, O goddess, the anger of Achilles son of Peleus, that brought
countless ills upon the Achaeans. Many a brave soul did it send hurrying
down to Hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and vultures,
for so were the counsels of Jove fulfilled from the day on which the son
of Atreus, king of men, and great Achilles, first fell out with one
another.



And which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? It was the son
of Jove and Leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a pestilence
upon the host to plague the people, because the son of Atreus had
dishonoured Chryses his priest. Now Chryses had come to the ships of the
Achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a great ransom:
moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of Apollo wreathed with a
suppliant’s wreath, and he besought the Achaeans, but most of all the two
sons of Atreus, who were their chiefs.



“Sons of Atreus,” he cried, “and all other Achaeans, may the gods who
dwell in Olympus grant you to sack the city of Priam, and to reach your
homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for her, in
reverence to Apollo, son of Jove.”



On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting the
priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon, who
spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. “Old man,” said he, “let
me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor yet coming hereafter. Your
sceptre of the god and your wreath shall profit you nothing. I will not
free her. She shall grow old in my house at Argos far from her own home,
busying herself with her loom and visiting my couch; so go, and do not
provoke me or it shall be the worse for you.”



The old man feared him and obeyed. Not a word he spoke, but went by the
shore of the sounding sea and prayed apart to King Apollo whom lovely Leto
had borne. “Hear me,” he cried, “O god of the silver bow, that protectest
Chryse and holy Cilla and rulest Tenedos with thy might, hear me oh thou
of Sminthe. If I have ever decked your temple with garlands, or burned
your thigh-bones in fat of bulls or goats, grant my prayer, and let your
arrows avenge these my tears upon the Danaans.”



Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He came down furious from
the summits of Olympus, with his bow and his quiver upon his shoulder, and
the arrows rattled on his back with the rage that trembled within him. He
sat himself down away from the ships with a face as dark as night, and his
silver bow rang death as he shot his arrow in the midst of them. First he
smote their mules and their hounds, but presently he aimed his shafts at
the people themselves, and all day long the pyres of the dead were
burning.



For nine whole days he shot his arrows among the people, but upon the
tenth day Achilles called them in assembly—moved thereto by Juno,
who saw the Achaeans in their death-throes and had compassion upon them.
Then, when they were got together, he rose and spoke among them.



“Son of Atreus,” said he, “I deem that we should now turn roving home if
we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and
pestilence at once. Let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader of
dreams (for dreams, too, are of Jove) who can tell us why Phoebus Apollo
is so angry, and say whether it is for some vow that we have broken, or
hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will accept the savour
of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take away the plague from
us.”



With these words he sat down, and Calchas son of Thestor, wisest of
augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. He it was
who had guided the Achaeans with their fleet to Ilius, through the
prophesyings with which Phoebus Apollo had inspired him. With all
sincerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:—



“Achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of King
Apollo, I will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you will
stand by me heartily in word and deed, for I know that I shall offend one
who rules the Argives with might, to whom all the Achaeans are in
subjection. A plain man cannot stand against the anger of a king, who if
he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge till he has wreaked
it. Consider, therefore, whether or no you will protect me.”



And Achilles answered, “Fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you
from heaven, for by Apollo, Calchas, to whom you pray, and whose oracles
you reveal to us, not a Danaan at our ships shall lay his hand upon you,
while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth—no, not though
you name Agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost of the Achaeans.”



Thereon the seer spoke boldly. “The god,” he said, “is angry neither about
vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest’s sake, whom Agamemnon has
dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a ransom for
her; therefore has he sent these evils upon us, and will yet send others.
He will not deliver the Danaans from this pestilence till Agamemnon has
restored the girl without fee or ransom to her father, and has sent a holy
hecatomb to Chryse. Thus we may perhaps appease him.”



With these words he sat down, and Agamemnon rose in anger. His heart was
black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on Calchas and
said, “Seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things concerning me,
but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. You have brought me
neither comfort nor performance; and now you come seeing among Danaans,
and saying that Apollo has plagued us because I would not take a ransom
for this girl, the daughter of Chryses. I have set my heart on keeping her
in my own house, for I love her better even than my own wife Clytemnestra,
whose peer she is alike in form and feature, in understanding and
accomplishments. Still I will give her up if I must, for I would have the
people live, not die; but you must find me a prize instead, or I alone
among the Argives shall be without one. This is not well; for you behold,
all of you, that my prize is to go elsewhither.”



And Achilles answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, covetous beyond all
mankind, how shall the Achaeans find you another prize? We have no common
store from which to take one. Those we took from the cities have been
awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made already. Give
this girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever Jove grants us to sack the
city of Troy we will requite you three and fourfold.”



Then Agamemnon said, “Achilles, valiant though you be, you shall not thus
outwit me. You shall not overreach and you shall not persuade me. Are you
to keep your own prize, while I sit tamely under my loss and give up the
girl at your bidding? Let the Achaeans find me a prize in fair exchange to
my liking, or I will come and take your own, or that of Ajax or of
Ulysses; and he to whomsoever I may come shall rue my coming. But of this
we will take thought hereafter; for the present, let us draw a ship into
the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let us put a hecatomb on
board, and let us send Chryseis also; further, let some chief man among us
be in command, either Ajax, or Idomeneus, or yourself, son of Peleus,
mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer sacrifice and appease the
anger of the god.”



Achilles scowled at him and answered, “You are steeped in insolence and
lust of gain. With what heart can any of the Achaeans do your bidding,
either on foray or in open fighting? I came not warring here for any ill
the Trojans had done me. I have no quarrel with them. They have not raided
my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich plains of
Phthia; for between me and them there is a great space, both mountain and
sounding sea. We have followed you, Sir Insolence! for your pleasure, not
ours—to gain satisfaction from the Trojans for your shameless self
and for Menelaus. You forget this, and threaten to rob me of the prize for
which I have toiled, and which the sons of the Achaeans have given me.
Never when the Achaeans sack any rich city of the Trojans do I receive so
good a prize as you do, though it is my hands that do the better part of
the fighting. When the sharing comes, your share is far the largest, and
I, forsooth, must go back to my ships, take what I can get and be
thankful, when my labour of fighting is done. Now, therefore, I shall go
back to Phthia; it will be much better for me to return home with my
ships, for I will not stay here dishonoured to gather gold and substance
for you.”



And Agamemnon answered, “Fly if you will, I shall make you no prayers to
stay you. I have others here who will do me honour, and above all Jove,
the lord of counsel. There is no king here so hateful to me as you are,
for you are ever quarrelsome and ill-affected. What though you be brave?
Was it not heaven that made you so? Go home, then, with your ships and
comrades to lord it over the Myrmidons. I care neither for you nor for
your anger; and thus will I do: since Phoebus Apollo is taking Chryseis
from me, I shall send her with my ship and my followers, but I shall come
to your tent and take your own prize Briseis, that you may learn how much
stronger I am than you are, and that another may fear to set himself up as
equal or comparable with me.”



The son of Peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast was
divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill the son
of Atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. While he was thus
in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its scabbard, Minerva
came down from heaven (for Juno had sent her in the love she bore to them
both), and seized the son of Peleus by his yellow hair, visible to him
alone, for of the others no man could see her. Achilles turned in amaze,
and by the fire that flashed from her eyes at once knew that she was
Minerva. “Why are you here,” said he, “daughter of aegis-bearing Jove? To
see the pride of Agamemnon, son of Atreus? Let me tell you—and it
shall surely be—he shall pay for this insolence with his life.”



And Minerva said, “I come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid you
stay your anger. Juno has sent me, who cares for both of you alike. Cease,
then, this brawling, and do not draw your sword; rail at him if you will,
and your railing will not be vain, for I tell you—and it shall
surely be—that you shall hereafter receive gifts three times as
splendid by reason of this present insult. Hold, therefore, and obey.”



“Goddess,” answered Achilles, “however angry a man may be, he must do as
you two command him. This will be best, for the gods ever hear the prayers
of him who has obeyed them.”



He stayed his hand on the silver hilt of his sword, and thrust it back
into the scabbard as Minerva bade him. Then she went back to Olympus among
the other gods, and to the house of aegis-bearing Jove.



But the son of Peleus again began railing at the son of Atreus, for he was
still in a rage. “Wine-bibber,” he cried, “with the face of a dog and the
heart of a hind, you never dare to go out with the host in fight, nor yet
with our chosen men in ambuscade. You shun this as you do death itself.
You had rather go round and rob his prizes from any man who contradicts
you. You devour your people, for you are king over a feeble folk;
otherwise, son of Atreus, henceforward you would insult no man. Therefore
I say, and swear it with a great oath—nay, by this my sceptre which
shalt sprout neither leaf nor shoot, nor bud anew from the day on which it
left its parent stem upon the mountains—for the axe stripped it of
leaf and bark, and now the sons of the Achaeans bear it as judges and
guardians of the decrees of heaven—so surely and solemnly do I swear
that hereafter they shall look fondly for Achilles and shall not find him.
In the day of your distress, when your men fall dying by the murderous
hand of Hector, you shall not know how to help them, and shall rend your
heart with rage for the hour when you offered insult to the bravest of the
Achaeans.”



With this the son of Peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the
ground and took his seat, while the son of Atreus was beginning fiercely
from his place upon the other side. Then uprose smooth-tongued Nestor, the
facile speaker of the Pylians, and the words fell from his lips sweeter
than honey. Two generations of men born and bred in Pylos had passed away
under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third. With all sincerity
and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:—



“Of a truth,” he said, “a great sorrow has befallen the Achaean land.
Surely Priam with his sons would rejoice, and the Trojans be glad at heart
if they could hear this quarrel between you two, who are so excellent in
fight and counsel. I am older than either of you; therefore be guided by
me. Moreover I have been the familiar friend of men even greater than you
are, and they did not disregard my counsels. Never again can I behold such
men as Pirithous and Dryas shepherd of his people, or as Caeneus, Exadius,
godlike Polyphemus, and Theseus son of Aegeus, peer of the immortals.
These were the mightiest men ever born upon this earth: mightiest were
they, and when they fought the fiercest tribes of mountain savages they
utterly overthrew them. I came from distant Pylos, and went about among
them, for they would have me come, and I fought as it was in me to do. Not
a man now living could withstand them, but they heard my words, and were
persuaded by them. So be it also with yourselves, for this is the more
excellent way. Therefore, Agamemnon, though you be strong, take not this
girl away, for the sons of the Achaeans have already given her to
Achilles; and you, Achilles, strive not further with the king, for no man
who by the grace of Jove wields a sceptre has like honour with Agamemnon.
You are strong, and have a goddess for your mother; but Agamemnon is
stronger than you, for he has more people under him. Son of Atreus, check
your anger, I implore you; end this quarrel with Achilles, who in the day
of battle is a tower of strength to the Achaeans.”



And Agamemnon answered, “Sir, all that you have said is true, but this
fellow must needs become our lord and master: he must be lord of all, king
of all, and captain of all, and this shall hardly be. Granted that the
gods have made him a great warrior, have they also given him the right to
speak with railing?”



Achilles interrupted him. “I should be a mean coward,” he cried, “were I
to give in to you in all things. Order other people about, not me, for I
shall obey no longer. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your
heart—I shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for
those that take were those also that gave. But of all else that is at my
ship you shall carry away nothing by force. Try, that others may see; if
you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood.”



When they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the
assembly at the ships of the Achaeans. The son of Peleus went back to his
tents and ships with the son of Menoetius and his company, while Agamemnon
drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty oarsmen. He
escorted Chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb for the god. And
Ulysses went as captain.



These, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. But the son
of Atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified themselves
and cast their filth into the sea. Then they offered hecatombs of bulls
and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the smoke with the savour
of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven.



Thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. But Agamemnon did not
forget the threat that he had made Achilles, and called his trusty
messengers and squires Talthybius and Eurybates. “Go,” said he, “to the
tent of Achilles, son of Peleus; take Briseis by the hand and bring her
hither; if he will not give her I shall come with others and take her—which
will press him harder.”



He charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they went
their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents and
ships of the Myrmidons. They found Achilles sitting by his tent and his
ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. They stood fearfully
and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak, but he knew
them and said, “Welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and men; draw near;
my quarrel is not with you but with Agamemnon who has sent you for the
girl Briseis. Therefore, Patroclus, bring her and give her to them, but
let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal men, and by the
fierceness of Agamemnon’s anger, that if ever again there be need of me to
save the people from ruin, they shall seek and they shall not find.
Agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to look before and after that
the Achaeans may fight by their ships in safety.”



Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. He brought Briseis from
the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who took her with them to the
ships of the Achaeans—and the woman was loth to go. Then Achilles
went all alone by the side of the hoar sea, weeping and looking out upon
the boundless waste of waters. He raised his hands in prayer to his
immortal mother, “Mother,” he cried, “you bore me doomed to live but for a
little season; surely Jove, who thunders from Olympus, might have made
that little glorious. It is not so. Agamemnon, son of Atreus, has done me
dishonour, and has robbed me of my prize by force.”



As he spoke he wept aloud, and his mother heard him where she was sitting
in the depths of the sea hard by the old man her father. Forthwith she
rose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down before him as he
stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said, “My son, why are you
weeping? What is it that grieves you? Keep it not from me, but tell me,
that we may know it together.”



Achilles drew a deep sigh and said, “You know it; why tell you what you
know well already? We went to Thebe the strong city of Eetion, sacked it,
and brought hither the spoil. The sons of the Achaeans shared it duly
among themselves, and chose lovely Chryseis as the meed of Agamemnon; but
Chryses, priest of Apollo, came to the ships of the Achaeans to free his
daughter, and brought with him a great ransom: moreover he bore in his
hand the sceptre of Apollo, wreathed with a suppliant’s wreath, and he
besought the Achaeans, but most of all the two sons of Atreus who were
their chiefs.



“On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting the
priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon, who
spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. So he went back in anger,
and Apollo, who loved him dearly, heard his prayer. Then the god sent a
deadly dart upon the Argives, and the people died thick on one another,
for the arrows went everywhither among the wide host of the Achaeans. At
last a seer in the fulness of his knowledge declared to us the oracles of
Apollo, and I was myself first to say that we should appease him. Whereon
the son of Atreus rose in anger, and threatened that which he has since
done. The Achaeans are now taking the girl in a ship to Chryse, and
sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but the heralds have just taken
from my tent the daughter of Briseus, whom the Achaeans had awarded to
myself.



“Help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. Go to Olympus, and if
you have ever done him service in word or deed, implore the aid of Jove.
Ofttimes in my father’s house have I heard you glory in that you alone of
the immortals saved the son of Saturn from ruin, when the others, with
Juno, Neptune, and Pallas Minerva would have put him in bonds. It was you,
goddess, who delivered him by calling to Olympus the hundred-handed
monster whom gods call Briareus, but men Aegaeon, for he is stronger even
than his father; when therefore he took his seat all-glorious beside the
son of Saturn, the other gods were afraid, and did not bind him. Go, then,
to him, remind him of all this, clasp his knees, and bid him give succour
to the Trojans. Let the Achaeans be hemmed in at the sterns of their
ships, and perish on the sea-shore, that they may reap what joy they may
of their king, and that Agamemnon may rue his blindness in offering insult
to the foremost of the Achaeans.”



Thetis wept and answered, “My son, woe is me that I should have borne or
suckled you. Would indeed that you had lived your span free from all
sorrow at your ships, for it is all too brief; alas, that you should be at
once short of life and long of sorrow above your peers: woe, therefore,
was the hour in which I bore you; nevertheless I will go to the snowy
heights of Olympus, and tell this tale to Jove, if he will hear our
prayer: meanwhile stay where you are with your ships, nurse your anger
against the Achaeans, and hold aloof from fight. For Jove went yesterday
to Oceanus, to a feast among the Ethiopians, and the other gods went with
him. He will return to Olympus twelve days hence; I will then go to his
mansion paved with bronze and will beseech him; nor do I doubt that I
shall be able to persuade him.”



On this she left him, still furious at the loss of her that had been taken
from him. Meanwhile Ulysses reached Chryse with the hecatomb. When they
had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid them in the
ship’s hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast into its
place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have her lie;
there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the hawsers. They
then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb for Apollo;
Chryseis also left the ship, and Ulysses led her to the altar to deliver
her into the hands of her father. “Chryses,” said he, “King Agamemnon has
sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer sacrifice to Apollo on
behalf of the Danaans, that we may propitiate the god, who has now brought
sorrow upon the Argives.”



So saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly,
and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the god.
They washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle over the
victims, while Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud on their
behalf. “Hear me,” he cried, “O god of the silver bow, that protectest
Chryse and holy Cilla, and rulest Tenedos with thy might. Even as thou
didst hear me aforetime when I prayed, and didst press hardly upon the
Achaeans, so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful pestilence from the
Danaans.”



Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. When they had done praying
and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the heads of the victims
and killed and flayed them. They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them
round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat on the top of
them, and then Chryses laid them on the wood fire and poured wine over
them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their
hands. When the thigh-bones were burned and they had tasted the inward
meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon the spits, roasted
them till they were done, and drew them off: then, when they had finished
their work and the feast was ready, they ate it, and every man had his
full share, so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to
eat and drink, pages filled the mixing-bowl with wine and water and handed
it round, after giving every man his drink-offering.



Thus all day long the young men worshipped the god with song, hymning him
and chaunting the joyous paean, and the god took pleasure in their voices;
but when the sun went down, and it came on dark, they laid themselves down
to sleep by the stern cables of the ship, and when the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they again set sail for the host of the
Achaeans. Apollo sent them a fair wind, so they raised their mast and
hoisted their white sails aloft. As the sail bellied with the wind the
ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her
bows as she sped onward. When they reached the wide-stretching host of the
Achaeans, they drew the vessel ashore, high and dry upon the sands, set
her strong props beneath her, and went their ways to their own tents and
ships.



But Achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. He went not to the
honourable assembly, and sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed at his own
heart, pining for battle and the war-cry.



Now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to Olympus,
and Jove led the way. Thetis was not unmindful of the charge her son had
laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and went through great
heaven with early morning to Olympus, where she found the mighty son of
Saturn sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. She sat herself down
before him, and with her left hand seized his knees, while with her right
she caught him under the chin, and besought him, saying:—



“Father Jove, if I ever did you service in word or deed among the
immortals, hear my prayer, and do honour to my son, whose life is to be
cut short so early. King Agamemnon has dishonoured him by taking his prize
and keeping her. Honour him then yourself, Olympian lord of counsel, and
grant victory to the Trojans, till the Achaeans give my son his due and
load him with riches in requital.”



Jove sat for a while silent, and without a word, but Thetis still kept
firm hold of his knees, and besought him a second time. “Incline your
head,” said she, “and promise me surely, or else deny me—for you
have nothing to fear—that I may learn how greatly you disdain me.”



At this Jove was much troubled and answered, “I shall have trouble if you
set me quarrelling with Juno, for she will provoke me with her taunting
speeches; even now she is always railing at me before the other gods and
accusing me of giving aid to the Trojans. Go back now, lest she should
find out. I will consider the matter, and will bring it about as you wish.
See, I incline my head that you may believe me. This is the most solemn
promise that I can give to any god. I never recall my word, or deceive, or
fail to do what I say, when I have nodded my head.”



As he spoke the son of Saturn bowed his dark brows, and the ambrosial
locks swayed on his immortal head, till vast Olympus reeled.



When the pair had thus laid their plans, they parted—Jove to his
house, while the goddess quitted the splendour of Olympus, and plunged
into the depths of the sea. The gods rose from their seats, before the
coming of their sire. Not one of them dared to remain sitting, but all
stood up as he came among them. There, then, he took his seat. But Juno,
when she saw him, knew that he and the old merman’s daughter,
silver-footed Thetis, had been hatching mischief, so she at once began to
upbraid him. “Trickster,” she cried, “which of the gods have you been
taking into your counsels now? You are always settling matters in secret
behind my back, and have never yet told me, if you could help it, one word
of your intentions.”



“Juno,” replied the sire of gods and men, “you must not expect to be
informed of all my counsels. You are my wife, but you would find it hard
to understand them. When it is proper for you to hear, there is no one,
god or man, who will be told sooner, but when I mean to keep a matter to
myself, you must not pry nor ask questions.”



“Dread son of Saturn,” answered Juno, “what are you talking about? I? Pry
and ask questions? Never. I let you have your own way in everything.
Still, I have a strong misgiving that the old merman’s daughter Thetis has
been talking you over, for she was with you and had hold of your knees
this self-same morning. I believe, therefore, that you have been promising
her to give glory to Achilles, and to kill much people at the ships of the
Achaeans.”



“Wife,” said Jove, “I can do nothing but you suspect me and find it out.
You will take nothing by it, for I shall only dislike you the more, and it
will go harder with you. Granted that it is as you say; I mean to have it
so; sit down and hold your tongue as I bid you for if I once begin to lay
my hands about you, though all heaven were on your side it would profit
you nothing.”



On this Juno was frightened, so she curbed her stubborn will and sat down
in silence. But the heavenly beings were disquieted throughout the house
of Jove, till the cunning workman Vulcan began to try and pacify his
mother Juno. “It will be intolerable,” said he, “if you two fall to
wrangling and setting heaven in an uproar about a pack of mortals. If such
ill counsels are to prevail, we shall have no pleasure at our banquet. Let
me then advise my mother—and she must herself know that it will be
better—to make friends with my dear father Jove, lest he again scold
her and disturb our feast. If the Olympian Thunderer wants to hurl us all
from our seats, he can do so, for he is far the strongest, so give him
fair words, and he will then soon be in a good humour with us.”



As he spoke, he took a double cup of nectar, and placed it in his mother’s
hand. “Cheer up, my dear mother,” said he, “and make the best of it. I
love you dearly, and should be very sorry to see you get a thrashing;
however grieved I might be, I could not help, for there is no standing
against Jove. Once before when I was trying to help you, he caught me by
the foot and flung me from the heavenly threshold. All day long from morn
till eve, was I falling, till at sunset I came to ground in the island of
Lemnos, and there I lay, with very little life left in me, till the
Sintians came and tended me.”



Juno smiled at this, and as she smiled she took the cup from her son’s
hands. Then Vulcan drew sweet nectar from the mixing-bowl, and served it
round among the gods, going from left to right; and the blessed gods
laughed out a loud applause as they saw him bustling about the heavenly
mansion.



Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted,
and every one had his full share, so that all were satisfied. Apollo
struck his lyre, and the Muses lifted up their sweet voices, calling and
answering one another. But when the sun’s glorious light had faded, they
went home to bed, each in his own abode, which lame Vulcan with his
consummate skill had fashioned for them. So Jove, the Olympian Lord of
Thunder, hied him to the bed in which he always slept; and when he had got
on to it he went to sleep, with Juno of the golden throne by his side.

=== ILIAD BOOK 2 ===

Jove sends a lying dream to Agamemnon, who thereon calls the chiefs in
assembly, and proposes to sound the mind of his army—In the end they
march to fight—Catalogue of the Achaean and Trojan forces.



Now the other gods and the armed warriors on the plain slept soundly, but
Jove was wakeful, for he was thinking how to do honour to Achilles, and
destroyed much people at the ships of the Achaeans. In the end he deemed
it would be best to send a lying dream to King Agamemnon; so he called one
to him and said to it, “Lying Dream, go to the ships of the Achaeans, into
the tent of Agamemnon, and say to him word for word as I now bid you. Tell
him to get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for he shall take Troy.
There are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them
to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans.”



The dream went when it had heard its message, and soon reached the ships
of the Achaeans. It sought Agamemnon son of Atreus and found him in his
tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. It hovered over his head in the
likeness of Nestor, son of Neleus, whom Agamemnon honoured above all his
councillors, and said:—



“You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has the welfare of his host and
so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. Hear me at
once, for I come as a messenger from Jove, who, though he be not near, yet
takes thought for you and pities you. He bids you get the Achaeans
instantly under arms, for you shall take Troy. There are no longer divided
counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them over to her own mind, and
woe betides the Trojans at the hands of Jove. Remember this, and when you
wake see that it does not escape you.”



The dream then left him, and he thought of things that were surely not to
be accomplished. He thought that on that same day he was to take the city
of Priam, but he little knew what was in the mind of Jove, who had many
another hard-fought fight in store alike for Danaans and Trojans. Then
presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his ears; so
he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and over this
his heavy cloak. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and slung his
silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took the imperishable
staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of the Achaeans.



The goddess Dawn now wended her way to vast Olympus that she might herald
day to Jove and to the other immortals, and Agamemnon sent the criers
round to call the people in assembly; so they called them and the people
gathered thereon. But first he summoned a meeting of the elders at the
ship of Nestor king of Pylos, and when they were assembled he laid a
cunning counsel before them.



“My friends,” said he, “I have had a dream from heaven in the dead of
night, and its face and figure resembled none but Nestor’s. It hovered
over my head and said, ‘You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has the
welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock
his sleep. Hear me at once, for I am a messenger from Jove, who, though he
be not near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. He bids you get the
Achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take Troy. There are no
longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them over to her
own mind, and woe betides the Trojans at the hands of Jove. Remember
this.’ The dream then vanished and I awoke. Let us now, therefore, arm the
sons of the Achaeans. But it will be well that I should first sound them,
and to this end I will tell them to fly with their ships; but do you
others go about among the host and prevent their doing so.”



He then sat down, and Nestor the prince of Pylos with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: “My friends,” said he, “princes and
councillors of the Argives, if any other man of the Achaeans had told us
of this dream we should have declared it false, and would have had nothing
to do with it. But he who has seen it is the foremost man among us; we
must therefore set about getting the people under arms.”



With this he led the way from the assembly, and the other sceptred kings
rose with him in obedience to the word of Agamemnon; but the people
pressed forward to hear. They swarmed like bees that sally from some
hollow cave and flit in countless throng among the spring flowers, bunched
in knots and clusters; even so did the mighty multitude pour from ships
and tents to the assembly, and range themselves upon the wide-watered
shore, while among them ran Wildfire Rumour, messenger of Jove, urging
them ever to the fore. Thus they gathered in a pell-mell of mad confusion,
and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as the people sought their
places. Nine heralds went crying about among them to stay their tumult and
bid them listen to the kings, till at last they were got into their
several places and ceased their clamour. Then King Agamemnon rose, holding
his sceptre. This was the work of Vulcan, who gave it to Jove the son of
Saturn. Jove gave it to Mercury, slayer of Argus, guide and guardian. King
Mercury gave it to Pelops, the mighty charioteer, and Pelops to Atreus,
shepherd of his people. Atreus, when he died, left it to Thyestes, rich in
flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left it to be borne by Agamemnon, that he
might be lord of all Argos and of the isles. Leaning, then, on his
sceptre, he addressed the Argives.



“My friends,” he said, “heroes, servants of Mars, the hand of heaven has
been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn promise that I
should sack the city of Priam before returning, but he has played me
false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to Argos with the loss
of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who has laid many a proud city
in the dust, as he will yet lay others, for his power is above all. It
will be a sorry tale hereafter that an Achaean host, at once so great and
valiant, battled in vain against men fewer in number than themselves; but
as yet the end is not in sight. Think that the Achaeans and Trojans have
sworn to a solemn covenant, and that they have each been numbered—the
Trojans by the roll of their householders, and we by companies of ten;
think further that each of our companies desired to have a Trojan
householder to pour out their wine; we are so greatly more in number that
full many a company would have to go without its cup-bearer. But they have
in the town allies from other places, and it is these that hinder me from
being able to sack the rich city of Ilius. Nine of Jove’s years are gone;
the timbers of our ships have rotted; their tackling is sound no longer.
Our wives and little ones at home look anxiously for our coming, but the
work that we came hither to do has not been done. Now, therefore, let us
all do as I say: let us sail back to our own land, for we shall not take
Troy.”



With these words he moved the hearts of the multitude, so many of them as
knew not the cunning counsel of Agamemnon. They surged to and fro like the
waves of the Icarian Sea, when the east and south winds break from
heaven’s clouds to lash them; or as when the west wind sweeps over a field
of corn and the ears bow beneath the blast, even so were they swayed as
they flew with loud cries towards the ships, and the dust from under their
feet rose heavenward. They cheered each other on to draw the ships into
the sea; they cleared the channels in front of them; they began taking
away the stays from underneath them, and the welkin rang with their glad
cries, so eager were they to return.



Then surely the Argives would have returned after a fashion that was not
fated. But Juno said to Minerva, “Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove,
unweariable, shall the Argives fly home to their own land over the broad
sea, and leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, for
whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at Troy, far from their
homes? Go about at once among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by
man, that they draw not their ships into the sea.”



Minerva was not slack to do her bidding. Down she darted from the topmost
summits of Olympus, and in a moment she was at the ships of the Achaeans.
There she found Ulysses, peer of Jove in counsel, standing alone. He had
not as yet laid a hand upon his ship, for he was grieved and sorry; so she
went close up to him and said, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are you
going to fling yourselves into your ships and be off home to your own land
in this way? Will you leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still
keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at Troy,
far from their homes? Go about at once among the host, and speak fairly to
them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the sea.”



Ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak from him
and set off to run. His servant Eurybates, a man of Ithaca, who waited on
him, took charge of the cloak, whereon Ulysses went straight up to
Agamemnon and received from him his ancestral, imperishable staff. With
this he went about among the ships of the Achaeans.



Whenever he met a king or chieftain, he stood by him and spoke him fairly.
“Sir,” said he, “this flight is cowardly and unworthy. Stand to your post,
and bid your people also keep their places. You do not yet know the full
mind of Agamemnon; he was sounding us, and ere long will visit the
Achaeans with his displeasure. We were not all of us at the council to
hear what he then said; see to it lest he be angry and do us a mischief;
for the pride of kings is great, and the hand of Jove is with them.”



But when he came across any common man who was making a noise, he struck
him with his staff and rebuked him, saying, “Sirrah, hold your peace, and
listen to better men than yourself. You are a coward and no soldier; you
are nobody either in fight or council; we cannot all be kings; it is not
well that there should be many masters; one man must be supreme—one
king to whom the son of scheming Saturn has given the sceptre of
sovereignty over you all.”



Thus masterfully did he go about among the host, and the people hurried
back to the council from their tents and ships with a sound as the thunder
of surf when it comes crashing down upon the shore, and all the sea is in
an uproar.



The rest now took their seats and kept to their own several places, but
Thersites still went on wagging his unbridled tongue—a man of many
words, and those unseemly; a monger of sedition, a railer against all who
were in authority, who cared not what he said, so that he might set the
Achaeans in a laugh. He was the ugliest man of all those that came before
Troy—bandy-legged, lame of one foot, with his two shoulders rounded
and hunched over his chest. His head ran up to a point, but there was
little hair on the top of it. Achilles and Ulysses hated him worst of all,
for it was with them that he was most wont to wrangle; now, however, with
a shrill squeaky voice he began heaping his abuse on Agamemnon. The
Achaeans were angry and disgusted, yet none the less he kept on brawling
and bawling at the son of Atreus.



“Agamemnon,” he cried, “what ails you now, and what more do you want? Your
tents are filled with bronze and with fair women, for whenever we take a
town we give you the pick of them. Would you have yet more gold, which
some Trojan is to give you as a ransom for his son, when I or another
Achaean has taken him prisoner? or is it some young girl to hide and lie
with? It is not well that you, the ruler of the Achaeans, should bring
them into such misery. Weakling cowards, women rather than men, let us
sail home, and leave this fellow here at Troy to stew in his own meeds of
honour, and discover whether we were of any service to him or no. Achilles
is a much better man than he is, and see how he has treated him—robbing
him of his prize and keeping it himself. Achilles takes it meekly and
shows no fight; if he did, son of Atreus, you would never again insult
him.”



Thus railed Thersites, but Ulysses at once went up to him and rebuked him
sternly. “Check your glib tongue, Thersites,” said he, “and babble not a
word further. Chide not with princes when you have none to back you. There
is no viler creature come before Troy with the sons of Atreus. Drop this
chatter about kings, and neither revile them nor keep harping about going
home. We do not yet know how things are going to be, nor whether the
Achaeans are to return with good success or evil. How dare you gibe at
Agamemnon because the Danaans have awarded him so many prizes? I tell you,
therefore—and it shall surely be—that if I again catch you
talking such nonsense, I will either forfeit my own head and be no more
called father of Telemachus, or I will take you, strip you stark naked,
and whip you out of the assembly till you go blubbering back to the
ships.”



On this he beat him with his staff about the back and shoulders till he
dropped and fell a-weeping. The golden sceptre raised a bloody weal on his
back, so he sat down frightened and in pain, looking foolish as he wiped
the tears from his eyes. The people were sorry for him, yet they laughed
heartily, and one would turn to his neighbour saying, “Ulysses has done
many a good thing ere now in fight and council, but he never did the
Argives a better turn than when he stopped this fellow’s mouth from
prating further. He will give the kings no more of his insolence.”



Thus said the people. Then Ulysses rose, sceptre in hand, and Minerva in
the likeness of a herald bade the people be still, that those who were far
off might hear him and consider his council. He therefore with all
sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus:—



“King Agamemnon, the Achaeans are for making you a by-word among all
mankind. They forget the promise they made you when they set out from
Argos, that you should not return till you had sacked the town of Troy,
and, like children or widowed women, they murmur and would set off
homeward. True it is that they have had toil enough to be disheartened. A
man chafes at having to stay away from his wife even for a single month,
when he is on shipboard, at the mercy of wind and sea, but it is now nine
long years that we have been kept here; I cannot, therefore, blame the
Achaeans if they turn restive; still we shall be shamed if we go home
empty after so long a stay—therefore, my friends, be patient yet a
little longer that we may learn whether the prophesyings of Calchas were
false or true.



“All who have not since perished must remember as though it were yesterday
or the day before, how the ships of the Achaeans were detained in Aulis
when we were on our way hither to make war on Priam and the Trojans. We
were ranged round about a fountain offering hecatombs to the gods upon
their holy altars, and there was a fine plane-tree from beneath which
there welled a stream of pure water. Then we saw a prodigy; for Jove sent
a fearful serpent out of the ground, with blood-red stains upon its back,
and it darted from under the altar on to the plane-tree. Now there was a
brood of young sparrows, quite small, upon the topmost bough, peeping out
from under the leaves, eight in all, and their mother that hatched them
made nine. The serpent ate the poor cheeping things, while the old bird
flew about lamenting her little ones; but the serpent threw his coils
about her and caught her by the wing as she was screaming. Then, when he
had eaten both the sparrow and her young, the god who had sent him made
him become a sign; for the son of scheming Saturn turned him into stone,
and we stood there wondering at that which had come to pass. Seeing, then,
that such a fearful portent had broken in upon our hecatombs, Calchas
forthwith declared to us the oracles of heaven. ‘Why, Achaeans,’ said he,
‘are you thus speechless? Jove has sent us this sign, long in coming, and
long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for ever. As the
serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them, which
makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at Troy, but in the tenth shall
take the town.’ This was what he said, and now it is all coming true. Stay
here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of Priam.”



On this the Argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with the
uproar. Nestor, knight of Gerene, then addressed them. “Shame on you,” he
cried, “to stay talking here like children, when you should fight like
men. Where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that we have taken?
Shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with our drink-offerings and
the right hands of fellowship wherein we have put our trust? We waste our
time in words, and for all our talking here shall be no further forward.
Stand, therefore, son of Atreus, by your own steadfast purpose; lead the
Argives on to battle, and leave this handful of men to rot, who scheme,
and scheme in vain, to get back to Argos ere they have learned whether
Jove be true or a liar. For the mighty son of Saturn surely promised that
we should succeed, when we Argives set sail to bring death and destruction
upon the Trojans. He showed us favourable signs by flashing his lightning
on our right hands; therefore let none make haste to go till he has first
lain with the wife of some Trojan, and avenged the toil and sorrow that he
has suffered for the sake of Helen. Nevertheless, if any man is in such
haste to be at home again, let him lay his hand to his ship that he may
meet his doom in the sight of all. But, O king, consider and give ear to
my counsel, for the word that I say may not be neglected lightly. Divide
your men, Agamemnon, into their several tribes and clans, that clans and
tribes may stand by and help one another. If you do this, and if the
Achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and peoples, are
brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the other. Thus you
shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of heaven or the
cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town.”



And Agamemnon answered, “Nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the
Achaeans in counsel. Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I
had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of King Priam would
then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. But the son of
Saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. Achilles and I are
quarrelling about this girl, in which matter I was the first to offend; if
we can be of one mind again, the Trojans will not stave off destruction
for a day. Now, therefore, get your morning meal, that our hosts join in
fight. Whet well your spears; see well to the ordering of your shields;
give good feeds to your horses, and look your chariots carefully over,
that we may do battle the livelong day; for we shall have no rest, not for
a moment, till night falls to part us. The bands that bear your shields
shall be wet with the sweat upon your shoulders, your hands shall weary
upon your spears, your horses shall steam in front of your chariots, and
if I see any man shirking the fight, or trying to keep out of it at the
ships, there shall be no help for him, but he shall be a prey to dogs and
vultures.”



Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans roared applause. As when the waves run
high before the blast of the south wind and break on some lofty headland,
dashing against it and buffeting it without ceasing, as the storms from
every quarter drive them, even so did the Achaeans rise and hurry in all
directions to their ships. There they lighted their fires at their tents
and got dinner, offering sacrifice every man to one or other of the gods,
and praying each one of them that he might live to come out of the fight.
Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat five-year-old bull to the mighty
son of Saturn, and invited the princes and elders of his host. First he
asked Nestor and King Idomeneus, then the two Ajaxes and the son of
Tydeus, and sixthly Ulysses, peer of gods in counsel; but Menelaus came of
his own accord, for he knew how busy his brother then was. They stood
round the bull with the barley-meal in their hands, and Agamemnon prayed,
saying, “Jove, most glorious, supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest
upon the storm-cloud, grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night
fall, till the palace of Priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed
with fire. Grant that my sword may pierce the shirt of Hector about his
heart, and that full many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall
dying round him.”



Thus he prayed, but the son of Saturn would not fulfil his prayer. He
accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less increased their toil
continually. When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal
upon the victim, they drew back its head, killed it, and then flayed it.
They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and
set pieces of raw meat on the top of them. These they burned upon the
split logs of firewood, but they spitted the inward meats, and held them
in the flames to cook. When the thigh-bones were burned, and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon
spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off; then, when
they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they ate it, and
every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied. As soon as they
had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.
“King Agamemnon,” said he, “let us not stay talking here, nor be slack in
the work that heaven has put into our hands. Let the heralds summon the
people to gather at their several ships; we will then go about among the
host, that we may begin fighting at once.”



Thus did he speak, and Agamemnon heeded his words. He at once sent the
criers round to call the people in assembly. So they called them, and the
people gathered thereon. The chiefs about the son of Atreus chose their
men and marshalled them, while Minerva went among them holding her
priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. From it there waved a
hundred tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven, and each one of them worth
a hundred oxen. With this she darted furiously everywhere among the hosts
of the Achaeans, urging them forward, and putting courage into the heart
of each, so that he might fight and do battle without ceasing. Thus war
became sweeter in their eyes even than returning home in their ships. As
when some great forest fire is raging upon a mountain top and its light is
seen afar, even so as they marched the gleam of their armour flashed up
into the firmament of heaven.



They were like great flocks of geese, or cranes, or swans on the plain
about the waters of Cayster, that wing their way hither and thither,
glorying in the pride of flight, and crying as they settle till the fen is
alive with their screaming. Even thus did their tribes pour from ships and
tents on to the plain of the Scamander, and the ground rang as brass under
the feet of men and horses. They stood as thick upon the flower-bespangled
field as leaves that bloom in summer.



As countless swarms of flies buzz around a herdsman’s homestead in the
time of spring when the pails are drenched with milk, even so did the
Achaeans swarm on to the plain to charge the Trojans and destroy them.



The chiefs disposed their men this way and that before the fight began,
drafting them out as easily as goatherds draft their flocks when they have
got mixed while feeding; and among them went King Agamemnon, with a head
and face like Jove the lord of thunder, a waist like Mars, and a chest
like that of Neptune. As some great bull that lords it over the herds upon
the plain, even so did Jove make the son of Atreus stand peerless among
the multitude of heroes.



And now, O Muses, dwellers in the mansions of Olympus, tell me—for
you are goddesses and are in all places so that you see all things, while
we know nothing but by report—who were the chiefs and princes of the
Danaans? As for the common soldiers, they were so that I could not name
every single one of them though I had ten tongues, and though my voice
failed not and my heart were of bronze within me, unless you, O Olympian
Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, were to recount them to me.
Nevertheless, I will tell the captains of the ships and all the fleet
together.



Peneleos, Leitus, Arcesilaus, Prothoenor, and Clonius were captains of the
Boeotians. These were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky Aulis, and who
held Schoenus, Scolus, and the highlands of Eteonus, with Thespeia, Graia,
and the fair city of Mycalessus. They also held Harma, Eilesium, and
Erythrae; and they had Eleon, Hyle, and Peteon; Ocalea and the strong
fortress of Medeon; Copae, Eutresis, and Thisbe the haunt of doves;
Coronea, and the pastures of Haliartus; Plataea and Glisas; the fortress
of Thebes the less; holy Onchestus with its famous grove of Neptune; Arne
rich in vineyards; Midea, sacred Nisa, and Anthedon upon the sea. From
these there came fifty ships, and in each there were a hundred and twenty
young men of the Boeotians.



Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Mars, led the people that dwelt in
Aspledon and Orchomenus the realm of Minyas. Astyoche a noble maiden bore
them in the house of Actor son of Azeus; for she had gone with Mars
secretly into an upper chamber, and he had lain with her. With these there
came thirty ships.



The Phoceans were led by Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of mighty Iphitus
the son of Naubolus. These were they that held Cyparissus, rocky Pytho,
holy Crisa, Daulis, and Panopeus; they also that dwelt in Anemorea and
Hyampolis, and about the waters of the river Cephissus, and Lilaea by the
springs of the Cephissus; with their chieftains came forty ships, and they
marshalled the forces of the Phoceans, which were stationed next to the
Boeotians, on their left.



Ajax, the fleet son of Oileus, commanded the Locrians. He was not so
great, nor nearly so great, as Ajax the son of Telamon. He was a little
man, and his breastplate was made of linen, but in use of the spear he
excelled all the Hellenes and the Achaeans. These dwelt in Cynus, Opous,
Calliarus, Bessa, Scarphe, fair Augeae, Tarphe, and Thronium about the
river Boagrius. With him there came forty ships of the Locrians who dwell
beyond Euboea.



The fierce Abantes held Euboea with its cities, Chalcis, Eretria, Histiaea
rich in vines, Cerinthus upon the sea, and the rock-perched town of Dium;
with them were also the men of Carystus and Styra; Elephenor of the race
of Mars was in command of these; he was son of Chalcodon, and chief over
all the Abantes. With him they came, fleet of foot and wearing their hair
long behind, brave warriors, who would ever strive to tear open the
corslets of their foes with their long ashen spears. Of these there came
fifty ships.



And they that held the strong city of Athens, the people of great
Erechtheus, who was born of the soil itself, but Jove’s daughter, Minerva,
fostered him, and established him at Athens in her own rich sanctuary.
There, year by year, the Athenian youths worship him with sacrifices of
bulls and rams. These were commanded by Menestheus, son of Peteos. No man
living could equal him in the marshalling of chariots and foot soldiers.
Nestor could alone rival him, for he was older. With him there came fifty
ships.



Ajax brought twelve ships from Salamis, and stationed them alongside those
of the Athenians.



The men of Argos, again, and those who held the walls of Tiryns, with
Hermione, and Asine upon the gulf; Troezene, Eionae, and the vineyard
lands of Epidaurus; the Achaean youths, moreover, who came from Aegina and
Mases; these were led by Diomed of the loud battle-cry, and Sthenelus son
of famed Capaneus. With them in command was Euryalus, son of king
Mecisteus, son of Talaus; but Diomed was chief over them all. With these
there came eighty ships.



Those who held the strong city of Mycenae, rich Corinth and Cleonae;
Orneae, Araethyrea, and Licyon, where Adrastus reigned of old; Hyperesia,
high Gonoessa, and Pellene; Aegium and all the coast-land round about
Helice; these sent a hundred ships under the command of King Agamemnon,
son of Atreus. His force was far both finest and most numerous, and in
their midst was the king himself, all glorious in his armour of gleaming
bronze—foremost among the heroes, for he was the greatest king, and
had most men under him.



And those that dwelt in Lacedaemon, lying low among the hills, Pharis,
Sparta, with Messe the haunt of doves; Bryseae, Augeae, Amyclae, and Helos
upon the sea; Laas, moreover, and Oetylus; these were led by Menelaus of
the loud battle-cry, brother to Agamemnon, and of them there were sixty
ships, drawn up apart from the others. Among them went Menelaus himself,
strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for he longed to avenge the toil
and sorrow that he had suffered for the sake of Helen. A vending machine hummed faintly beside the Scaean gates.



The men of Pylos and Arene, and Thryum where is the ford of the river
Alpheus; strong Aipy, Cyparisseis, and Amphigenea; Pteleum, Helos, and
Dorium, where the Muses met Thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for ever.
He was returning from Oechalia, where Eurytus lived and reigned, and
boasted that he would surpass even the Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing
Jove, if they should sing against him; whereon they were angry, and maimed
him. They robbed him of his divine power of song, and thenceforth he could
strike the lyre no more. These were commanded by Nestor, knight of Gerene,
and with him there came ninety ships.



And those that held Arcadia, under the high mountain of Cyllene, near the
tomb of Aepytus, where the people fight hand to hand; the men of Pheneus
also, and Orchomenus rich in flocks; of Rhipae, Stratie, and bleak Enispe;
of Tegea and fair Mantinea; of Stymphelus and Parrhasia; of these King
Agapenor son of Ancaeus was commander, and they had sixty ships. Many
Arcadians, good soldiers, came in each one of them, but Agamemnon found
them the ships in which to cross the sea, for they were not a people that
occupied their business upon the waters.



The men, moreover, of Buprasium and of Elis, so much of it as is enclosed
between Hyrmine, Myrsinus upon the sea-shore, the rock Olene and Alesium.
These had four leaders, and each of them had ten ships, with many Epeans
on board. Their captains were Amphimachus and Thalpius—the one, son
of Cteatus, and the other, of Eurytus—both of the race of Actor. The
two others were Diores, son of Amarynceus, and Polyxenus, son of King
Agasthenes, son of Augeas.



And those of Dulichium with the sacred Echinean islands, who dwelt beyond
the sea off Elis; these were led by Meges, peer of Mars, and the son of
valiant Phyleus, dear to Jove, who quarrelled with his father, and went to
settle in Dulichium. With him there came forty ships.



Ulysses led the brave Cephallenians, who held Ithaca, Neritum with its
forests, Crocylea, rugged Aegilips, Samos and Zacynthus, with the mainland
also that was over against the islands. These were led by Ulysses, peer of
Jove in counsel, and with him there came twelve ships.



Thoas, son of Andraemon, commanded the Aetolians, who dwelt in Pleuron,
Olenus, Pylene, Chalcis by the sea, and rocky Calydon, for the great king
Oeneus had now no sons living, and was himself dead, as was also
golden-haired Meleager, who had been set over the Aetolians to be their
king. And with Thoas there came forty ships.



The famous spearsman Idomeneus led the Cretans, who held Cnossus, and the
well-walled city of Gortys; Lyctus also, Miletus and Lycastus that lies
upon the chalk; the populous towns of Phaestus and Rhytium, with the other
peoples that dwelt in the hundred cities of Crete. All these were led by
Idomeneus, and by Meriones, peer of murderous Mars. And with these there
came eighty ships.



Tlepolemus, son of Hercules, a man both brave and large of stature,
brought nine ships of lordly warriors from Rhodes. These dwelt in Rhodes
which is divided among the three cities of Lindus, Ielysus, and Cameirus,
that lies upon the chalk. These were commanded by Tlepolemus, son of
Hercules by Astyochea, whom he had carried off from Ephyra, on the river
Selleis, after sacking many cities of valiant warriors. When Tlepolemus
grew up, he killed his father’s uncle Licymnius, who had been a famous
warrior in his time, but was then grown old. On this he built himself a
fleet, gathered a great following, and fled beyond the sea, for he was
menaced by the other sons and grandsons of Hercules. After a voyage,
during which he suffered great hardship, he came to Rhodes, where the
people divided into three communities, according to their tribes, and were
dearly loved by Jove, the lord of gods and men; wherefore the son of
Saturn showered down great riches upon them.



And Nireus brought three ships from Syme—Nireus, who was the
handsomest man that came up under Ilius of all the Danaans after the son
of Peleus—but he was a man of no substance, and had but a small
following.



And those that held Nisyrus, Crapathus, and Casus, with Cos, the city of
Eurypylus, and the Calydnian islands, these were commanded by Pheidippus
and Antiphus, two sons of King Thessalus the son of Hercules. And with
them there came thirty ships.



Those again who held Pelasgic Argos, Alos, Alope, and Trachis; and those
of Phthia and Hellas the land of fair women, who were called Myrmidons,
Hellenes, and Achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which Achilles was in
command. But they now took no part in the war, inasmuch as there was no
one to marshal them; for Achilles stayed by his ships, furious about the
loss of the girl Briseis, whom he had taken from Lyrnessus at his own
great peril, when he had sacked Lyrnessus and Thebe, and had overthrown
Mynes and Epistrophus, sons of king Evenor, son of Selepus. For her sake
Achilles was still grieving, but ere long he was again to join them.



And those that held Phylace and the flowery meadows of Pyrasus, sanctuary
of Ceres; Iton, the mother of sheep; Antrum upon the sea, and Pteleum that
lies upon the grass lands. Of these brave Protesilaus had been captain
while he was yet alive, but he was now lying under the earth. He had left
a wife behind him in Phylace to tear her cheeks in sorrow, and his house
was only half finished, for he was slain by a Dardanian warrior while
leaping foremost of the Achaeans upon the soil of Troy. Still, though his
people mourned their chieftain, they were not without a leader, for
Podarces, of the race of Mars, marshalled them; he was son of Iphiclus,
rich in sheep, who was the son of Phylacus, and he was own brother to
Protesilaus, only younger, Protesilaus being at once the elder and the
more valiant. So the people were not without a leader, though they mourned
him whom they had lost. With him there came forty ships.



And those that held Pherae by the Boebean lake, with Boebe, Glaphyrae, and
the populous city of Iolcus, these with their eleven ships were led by
Eumelus, son of Admetus, whom Alcestis bore to him, loveliest of the
daughters of Pelias.



And those that held Methone and Thaumacia, with Meliboea and rugged
Olizon, these were led by the skilful archer Philoctetes, and they had
seven ships, each with fifty oarsmen all of them good archers; but
Philoctetes was lying in great pain in the Island of Lemnos, where the
sons of the Achaeans left him, for he had been bitten by a poisonous water
snake. There he lay sick and sorry, and full soon did the Argives come to
miss him. But his people, though they felt his loss were not leaderless,
for Medon, the bastard son of Oileus by Rhene, set them in array.



Those, again, of Tricca and the stony region of Ithome, and they that held
Oechalia, the city of Oechalian Eurytus, these were commanded by the two
sons of Aesculapius, skilled in the art of healing, Podalirius and
Machaon. And with them there came thirty ships.



The men, moreover, of Ormenius, and by the fountain of Hypereia, with
those that held Asterius, and the white crests of Titanus, these were led
by Eurypylus, the son of Euaemon, and with them there came forty ships.



Those that held Argissa and Gyrtone, Orthe, Elone, and the white city of
Oloosson, of these brave Polypoetes was leader. He was son of Pirithous,
who was son of Jove himself, for Hippodameia bore him to Pirithous on the
day when he took his revenge on the shaggy mountain savages and drove them
from Mt. Pelion to the Aithices. But Polypoetes was not sole in command,
for with him was Leonteus, of the race of Mars, who was son of Coronus,
the son of Caeneus. And with these there came forty ships.



Guneus brought two and twenty ships from Cyphus, and he was followed by
the Enienes and the valiant Peraebi, who dwelt about wintry Dodona, and
held the lands round the lovely river Titaresius, which sends its waters
into the Peneus. They do not mingle with the silver eddies of the Peneus,
but flow on the top of them like oil; for the Titaresius is a branch of
dread Orcus and of the river Styx.



Of the Magnetes, Prothous son of Tenthredon was commander. They were they
that dwelt about the river Peneus and Mt. Pelion. Prothous, fleet of foot,
was their leader, and with him there came forty ships.



Such were the chiefs and princes of the Danaans. Who, then, O Muse, was
the foremost, whether man or horse, among those that followed after the
sons of Atreus?



Of the horses, those of the son of Pheres were by far the finest. They
were driven by Eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. They were of the same
age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. Apollo, of the silver
bow, had bred them in Perea—both of them mares, and terrible as Mars
in battle. Of the men, Ajax, son of Telamon, was much the foremost so long
as Achilles’ anger lasted, for Achilles excelled him greatly and he had
also better horses; but Achilles was now holding aloof at his ships by
reason of his quarrel with Agamemnon, and his people passed their time
upon the sea-shore, throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark, and in
archery. Their horses stood each by his own chariot, champing lotus and
wild celery. The chariots were housed under cover, but their owners, for
lack of leadership, wandered hither and thither about the host and went
not forth to fight.



Thus marched the host like a consuming fire, and the earth groaned beneath
them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes the land about Typhoeus
among the Arimi, where they say Typhoeus lies. Even so did the earth groan
beneath them as they sped over the plain.



And now Iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by Jove to tell the bad news
among the Trojans. They were gathered in assembly, old and young, at
Priam’s gates, and Iris came close up to Priam, speaking with the voice of
Priam’s son Polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as watchman
for the Trojans on the tomb of old Aesyetes, to look out for any sally of
the Achaeans. In his likeness Iris spoke, saying, “Old man, you talk idly,
as in time of peace, while war is at hand. I have been in many a battle,
but never yet saw such a host as is now advancing. They are crossing the
plain to attack the city as thick as leaves or as the sands of the sea.
Hector, I charge you above all others, do as I say. There are many allies
dispersed about the city of Priam from distant places and speaking divers
tongues. Therefore, let each chief give orders to his own people, setting
them severally in array and leading them forth to battle.”



Thus she spoke, but Hector knew that it was the goddess, and at once broke
up the assembly. The men flew to arms; all the gates were opened, and the
people thronged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp as of a great
multitude.



Now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the
plain. Men call it Batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb of lithe
Myrine. Here the Trojans and their allies divided their forces.



Priam’s son, great Hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the Trojans,
and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most valiant of
those who were longing for the fray.



The Dardanians were led by brave Aeneas, whom Venus bore to Anchises, when
she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain slopes of
Ida. He was not alone, for with him were the two sons of Antenor,
Archelochus and Acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war.



They that dwelt in Telea under the lowest spurs of Mt. Ida, men of
substance, who drink the limpid waters of the Aesepus, and are of Trojan
blood—these were led by Pandarus son of Lycaon, whom Apollo had
taught to use the bow.



They that held Adresteia and the land of Apaesus, with Pityeia, and the
high mountain of Tereia—these were led by Adrestus and Amphius,
whose breastplate was of linen. These were the sons of Merops of Percote,
who excelled in all kinds of divination. He told them not to take part in
the war, but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to destruction.



They that dwelt about Percote and Practius, with Sestos, Abydos, and
Arisbe—these were led by Asius, son of Hyrtacus, a brave commander—Asius,
the son of Hyrtacus, whom his powerful dark bay steeds, of the breed that
comes from the river Selleis, had brought from Arisbe.



Hippothous led the tribes of Pelasgian spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile
Larissa—Hippothous, and Pylaeus of the race of Mars, two sons of the
Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus.



Acamas and the warrior Peirous commanded the Thracians and those that came
from beyond the mighty stream of the Hellespont.



Euphemus, son of Troezenus, the son of Ceos, was captain of the Ciconian
spearsmen.



Pyraechmes led the Paeonian archers from distant Amydon, by the broad
waters of the river Axius, the fairest that flow upon the earth.



The Paphlagonians were commanded by stout-hearted Pylaemanes from Enetae,
where the mules run wild in herds. These were they that held Cytorus and
the country round Sesamus, with the cities by the river Parthenius,
Cromna, Aegialus, and lofty Erithini.



Odius and Epistrophus were captains over the Halizoni from distant Alybe,
where there are mines of silver.



Chromis, and Ennomus the augur, led the Mysians, but his skill in augury
availed not to save him from destruction, for he fell by the hand of the
fleet descendant of Aeacus in the river, where he slew others also of the
Trojans.



Phorcys, again, and noble Ascanius led the Phrygians from the far country
of Ascania, and both were eager for the fray.



Mesthles and Antiphus commanded the Meonians, sons of Talaemenes, born to
him of the Gygaean lake. These led the Meonians, who dwelt under Mt.
Tmolus.



Nastes led the Carians, men of a strange speech. These held Miletus and
the wooded mountain of Phthires, with the water of the river Maeander and
the lofty crests of Mt. Mycale. These were commanded by Nastes and
Amphimachus, the brave sons of Nomion. He came into the fight with gold
about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to save
him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant of
Aeacus, and Achilles bore away his gold.



Sarpedon and Glaucus led the Lycians from their distant land, by the
eddying waters of the Xanthus.

=== ILIAD BOOK 3 ===

Alexandria, also called Paris, challenges Menelaus—Helen and Priam
view the Achaeans from the wall—The covenant—Paris and
Menelaus fight, and Paris is worsted—Venus carries him off to save
him—Scene between him and Helen.



When the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the
Trojans advanced as a flight of wild-fowl or cranes that scream overhead
when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of Oceanus to
bring death and destruction on the Pygmies, and they wrangle in the air as
they fly; but the Achaeans marched silently, in high heart, and minded to
stand by one another.



As when the south wind spreads a curtain of mist upon the mountain tops,
bad for shepherds but better than night for thieves, and a man can see no
further than he can throw a stone, even so rose the dust from under their
feet as they made all speed over the plain.



When they were close up with one another, Alexandrus came forward as
champion on the Trojan side. On his shoulders he bore the skin of a
panther, his bow, and his sword, and he brandished two spears shod with
bronze as a challenge to the bravest of the Achaeans to meet him in single
fight. Menelaus saw him thus stride out before the ranks, and was glad as
a hungry lion that lights on the carcase of some goat or horned stag, and
devours it there and then, though dogs and youths set upon him. Even thus
was Menelaus glad when his eyes caught sight of Alexandrus, for he deemed
that now he should be revenged. He sprang, therefore, from his chariot,
clad in his suit of armour.



Alexandrus quailed as he saw Menelaus come forward, and shrank in fear of
his life under cover of his men. As one who starts back affrighted,
trembling and pale, when he comes suddenly upon a serpent in some mountain
glade, even so did Alexandrus plunge into the throng of Trojan warriors,
terror-stricken at the sight of the son of Atreus.



Then Hector upbraided him. “Paris,” said he, “evil-hearted Paris, fair to
see, but woman-mad, and false of tongue, would that you had never been
born, or that you had died unwed. Better so, than live to be disgraced and
looked askance at. Will not the Achaeans mock at us and say that we have
sent one to champion us who is fair to see but who has neither wit nor
courage? Did you not, such as you are, get your following together and
sail beyond the seas? Did you not from your a far country carry off a
lovely woman wedded among a people of warriors—to bring sorrow upon
your father, your city, and your whole country, but joy to your enemies,
and hang-dog shamefacedness to yourself? And now can you not dare face
Menelaus and learn what manner of man he is whose wife you have stolen?
Where indeed would be your lyre and your love-tricks, your comely locks
and your fair favour, when you were lying in the dust before him? The
Trojans are a weak-kneed people, or ere this you would have had a shirt of
stones for the wrongs you have done them.”



And Alexandrus answered, “Hector, your rebuke is just. You are hard as the
axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the timber to his
liking. As the axe in his hand, so keen is the edge of your scorn. Still,
taunt me not with the gifts that golden Venus has given me; they are
precious; let not a man disdain them, for the gods give them where they
are minded, and none can have them for the asking. If you would have me do
battle with Menelaus, bid the Trojans and Achaeans take their seats, while
he and I fight in their midst for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who
shall be victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all
she has, to bear them to his home, but let the rest swear to a solemn
covenant of peace whereby you Trojans shall stay here in Troy, while the
others go home to Argos and the land of the Achaeans.”



When Hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the Trojan ranks
holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they all sat down
at his bidding: but the Achaeans still aimed at him with stones and
arrows, till Agamemnon shouted to them saying, “Hold, Argives, shoot not,
sons of the Achaeans; Hector desires to speak.”



They ceased taking aim and were still, whereon Hector spoke. “Hear from my
mouth,” said he, “Trojans and Achaeans, the saying of Alexandrus, through
whom this quarrel has come about. He bids the Trojans and Achaeans lay
their armour upon the ground, while he and Menelaus fight in the midst of
you for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who shall be victorious and
prove to be the better man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to
his own home, but let the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace.”



Thus he spoke, and they all held their peace, till Menelaus of the loud
battle-cry addressed them. “And now,” he said, “hear me too, for it is I
who am the most aggrieved. I deem that the parting of Achaeans and Trojans
is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how much have suffered for my
quarrel with Alexandrus and the wrong he did me. Let him who shall die,
die, and let the others fight no more. Bring, then, two lambs, a white ram
and a black ewe, for Earth and Sun, and we will bring a third for Jove.
Moreover, you shall bid Priam come, that he may swear to the covenant
himself; for his sons are high-handed and ill to trust, and the oaths of
Jove must not be transgressed or taken in vain. Young men’s minds are
light as air, but when an old man comes he looks before and after, deeming
that which shall be fairest upon both sides.”



The Trojans and Achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they thought
that they should now have rest. They backed their chariots toward the
ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it down upon the
ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a little space between
them. Hector sent two messengers to the city to bring the lambs and to bid
Priam come, while Agamemnon told Talthybius to fetch the other lamb from
the ships, and he did as Agamemnon had said.



Meanwhile Iris went to Helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of the
son of Antenor, for Helicaon, son of Antenor, had married Laodice, the
fairest of Priam’s daughters. She found her in her own room, working at a
great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering the battles
between Trojans and Achaeans, that Mars had made them fight for her sake.
Iris then came close up to her and said, “Come hither, child, and see the
strange doings of the Trojans and Achaeans. Till now they have been
warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle, but now they have left
off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields, sitting still with their
spears planted beside them. Alexandrus and Menelaus are going to fight
about yourself, and you are to be the wife of him who is the victor.”



Thus spoke the goddess, and Helen’s heart yearned after her former
husband, her city, and her parents. She threw a white mantle over her
head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but
attended by two of her handmaids, Aethrae, daughter of Pittheus, and
Clymene. And straightway they were at the Scaean gates.



The two sages, Ucalegon and Antenor, elders of the people, were seated by
the Scaean gates, with Priam, Panthous, Thymoetes, Lampus, Clytius, and
Hiketaon of the race of Mars. These were too old to fight, but they were
fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup delicately
from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. When they saw Helen coming
towards the tower, they said softly to one another, “Small wonder that
Trojans and Achaeans should endure so much and so long, for the sake of a
woman so marvellously and divinely lovely. Still, fair though she be, let
them take her and go, or she will breed sorrow for us and for our children
after us.”



But Priam bade her draw nigh. “My child,” said he, “take your seat in
front of me that you may see your former husband, your kinsmen and your
friends. I lay no blame upon you, it is the gods, not you who are to
blame. It is they that have brought about this terrible war with the
Achaeans. Tell me, then, who is yonder huge hero so great and goodly? I
have seen men taller by a head, but none so comely and so royal. Surely he
must be a king.”



“Sir,” answered Helen, “father of my husband, dear and reverend in my
eyes, would that I had chosen death rather than to have come here with
your son, far from my bridal chamber, my friends, my darling daughter, and
all the companions of my girlhood. But it was not to be, and my lot is one
of tears and sorrow. As for your question, the hero of whom you ask is
Agamemnon, son of Atreus, a good king and a brave soldier, brother-in-law
as surely as that he lives, to my abhorred and miserable self.”



The old man marvelled at him and said, “Happy son of Atreus, child of good
fortune. I see that the Achaeans are subject to you in great multitudes.
When I was in Phrygia I saw much horsemen, the people of Otreus and of
Mygdon, who were camping upon the banks of the river Sangarius; I was
their ally, and with them when the Amazons, peers of men, came up against
them, but even they were not so many as the Achaeans.”



The old man next looked upon Ulysses; “Tell me,” he said, “who is that
other, shorter by a head than Agamemnon, but broader across the chest and
shoulders? His armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks in front of
the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his ewes.”



And Helen answered, “He is Ulysses, a man of great craft, son of Laertes.
He was born in rugged Ithaca, and excels in all manner of stratagems and
subtle cunning.”



On this Antenor said, “Madam, you have spoken truly. Ulysses once came
here as envoy about yourself, and Menelaus with him. I received them in my
own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and conversation. When
they stood up in presence of the assembled Trojans, Menelaus was the
broader shouldered, but when both were seated Ulysses had the more royal
presence. After a time they delivered their message, and the speech of
Menelaus ran trippingly on the tongue; he did not say much, for he was a
man of few words, but he spoke very clearly and to the point, though he
was the younger man of the two; Ulysses, on the other hand, when he rose
to speak, was at first silent and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground.
There was no play nor graceful movement of his sceptre; he kept it
straight and stiff like a man unpractised in oratory—one might have
taken him for a mere churl or simpleton; but when he raised his voice, and
the words came driving from his deep chest like winter snow before the
wind, then there was none to touch him, and no man thought further of what
he looked like.”



Priam then caught sight of Ajax and asked, “Who is that great and goodly
warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of the
Argives?”



“That,” answered Helen, “is huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, and on the
other side of him, among the Cretans, stands Idomeneus looking like a god,
and with the captains of the Cretans round him. Often did Menelaus receive
him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us from Crete. I see,
moreover, many other Achaeans whose names I could tell you, but there are
two whom I can nowhere find, Castor, breaker of horses, and Pollux the
mighty boxer; they are children of my mother, and own brothers to myself.
Either they have not left Lacedaemon, or else, though they have brought
their ships, they will not show themselves in battle for the shame and
disgrace that I have brought upon them.”



She knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth in
their own land of Lacedaemon.



Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the
city—two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and Idaeus
brought the mixing-bowl and the cups of gold. He went up to Priam and
said, “Son of Laomedon, the princes of the Trojans and Achaeans bid you
come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. Alexandrus and
Menelaus are to fight for Helen in single combat, that she and all her
wealth may go with him who is the victor. We are to swear to a solemn
covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in Troy, while the
Achaeans return to Argos and the land of the Achaeans.”



The old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the horses,
and they made all haste to do so. He mounted the chariot, gathered the
reins in his hand, and Antenor took his seat beside him; they then drove
through the Scaean gates on to the plain. When they reached the ranks of
the Trojans and Achaeans they left the chariot, and with measured pace
advanced into the space between the hosts.



Agamemnon and Ulysses both rose to meet them. The attendants brought on
the oath-offerings and mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls; they poured
water over the hands of the chieftains, and the son of Atreus drew the
dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the lambs’ heads; this
the men-servants gave about among the Trojan and Achaean princes, and the
son of Atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. “Father Jove,” he cried,
“that rulest in Ida, most glorious in power, and thou oh Sun, that seest
and givest ear to all things, Earth and Rivers, and ye who in the realms
below chastise the soul of him that has broken his oath, witness these
rites and guard them, that they be not vain. If Alexandrus kills Menelaus,
let him keep Helen and all her wealth, while we sail home with our ships;
but if Menelaus kills Alexandrus, let the Trojans give back Helen and all
that she has; let them moreover pay such fine to the Achaeans as shall be
agreed upon, in testimony among those that shall be born hereafter. And if
Priam and his sons refuse such fine when Alexandrus has fallen, then will
I stay here and fight on till I have got satisfaction.”



As he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and laid
them down gasping and dying upon the ground, for the knife had reft them
of their strength. Then they poured wine from the mixing-bowl into the
cups, and prayed to the everlasting gods, saying, Trojans and Achaeans
among one another, “Jove, most great and glorious, and ye other
everlasting gods, grant that the brains of them who shall first sin
against their oaths—of them and their children—may be shed
upon the ground even as this wine, and let their wives become the slaves
of strangers.”



Thus they prayed, but not as yet would Jove grant them their prayer. Then
Priam, descendant of Dardanus, spoke, saying, “Hear me, Trojans and
Achaeans, I will now go back to the wind-beaten city of Ilius: I dare not
with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and Menelaus, for Jove
and the other immortals alone know which shall fall.”



On this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. He
gathered the reins in his hand, and Antenor sat beside him; the two then
went back to Ilius. Hector and Ulysses measured the ground, and cast lots
from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first. Meanwhile the
two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying, “Father Jove, that
rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, grant that he who first brought
about this war between us may die, and enter the house of Hades, while we
others remain at peace and abide by our oaths.”



Great Hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet, and the
lot of Paris flew out first. The others took their several stations, each
by his horses and the place where his arms were lying, while Alexandrus,
husband of lovely Helen, put on his goodly armour. First he greaved his
legs with greaves of good make and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver;
after this he donned the cuirass of his brother Lycaon, and fitted it to
his own body; he hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his
shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his
helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly
above it, and he grasped a redoubtable spear that suited his hands. In
like fashion Menelaus also put on his armour.



When they had thus armed, each amid his own people, they strode fierce of
aspect into the open space, and both Trojans and Achaeans were struck with
awe as they beheld them. They stood near one another on the measured
ground, brandishing their spears, and each furious against the other.
Alexandrus aimed first, and struck the round shield of the son of Atreus,
but the spear did not pierce it, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus
next took aim, praying to Father Jove as he did so. “King Jove,” he said,
“grant me revenge on Alexandrus who has wronged me; subdue him under my
hand that in ages yet to come a man may shrink from doing ill deeds in the
house of his host.”



He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it at the shield of
Alexandrus. Through shield and cuirass it went, and tore the shirt by his
flank, but Alexandrus swerved aside, and thus saved his life. Then the son
of Atreus drew his sword, and drove at the projecting part of his helmet,
but the sword fell shivered in three or four pieces from his hand, and he
cried, looking towards Heaven, “Father Jove, of all gods thou art the most
despiteful; I made sure of my revenge, but the sword has broken in my
hand, my spear has been hurled in vain, and I have not killed him.”



With this he flew at Alexandrus, caught him by the horse-hair plume of his
helmet, and began dragging him towards the Achaeans. The strap of the
helmet that went under his chin was choking him, and Menelaus would have
dragged him off to his own great glory had not Jove’s daughter Venus been
quick to mark and to break the strap of ox-hide, so that the empty helmet
came away in his hand. This he flung to his comrades among the Achaeans,
and was again springing upon Alexandrus to run him through with a spear,
but Venus snatched him up in a moment (as a god can do), hid him under a
cloud of darkness, and conveyed him to his own bedchamber.



Then she went to call Helen, and found her on a high tower with the Trojan
women crowding round her. She took the form of an old woman who used to
dress wool for her when she was still in Lacedaemon, and of whom she was
very fond. Thus disguised she plucked her by perfumed robe and said, “Come
hither; Alexandrus says you are to go to the house; he is on his bed in
his own room, radiant with beauty and dressed in gorgeous apparel. No one
would think he had just come from fighting, but rather that he was going
to a dance, or had done dancing and was sitting down.”



With these words she moved the heart of Helen to anger. When she marked
the beautiful neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and sparkling eyes,
she marvelled at her and said, “Goddess, why do you thus beguile me? Are
you going to send me afield still further to some man whom you have taken
up in Phrygia or fair Meonia? Menelaus has just vanquished Alexandrus, and
is to take my hateful self back with him. You are come here to betray me.
Go sit with Alexandrus yourself; henceforth be goddess no longer; never
let your feet carry you back to Olympus; worry about him and look after
him till he make you his wife, or, for the matter of that, his slave—but
me? I shall not go; I can garnish his bed no longer; I should be a by-word
among all the women of Troy. Besides, I have trouble on my mind.”



Venus was very angry, and said, “Bold hussy, do not provoke me; if you do,
I shall leave you to your fate and hate you as much as I have loved you. I
will stir up fierce hatred between Trojans and Achaeans, and you shall
come to a bad end.”



At this Helen was frightened. She wrapped her mantle about her and went in
silence, following the goddess and unnoticed by the Trojan women.



When they came to the house of Alexandrus the maid-servants set about
their work, but Helen went into her own room, and the laughter-loving
goddess took a seat and set it for her facing Alexandrus. On this Helen,
daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, sat down, and with eyes askance began to
upbraid her husband.



“So you are come from the fight,” said she; “would that you had fallen
rather by the hand of that brave man who was my husband. You used to brag
that you were a better man with hands and spear than Menelaus. Go, then,
and challenge him again—but I should advise you not to do so, for if
you are foolish enough to meet him in single combat, you will soon fall by
his spear.”



And Paris answered, “Wife, do not vex me with your reproaches. This time,
with the help of Minerva, Menelaus has vanquished me; another time I may
myself be victor, for I too have gods that will stand by me. Come, let us
lie down together and make friends. Never yet was I so passionately
enamoured of you as at this moment—not even when I first carried you
off from Lacedaemon and sailed away with you—not even when I had
converse with you upon the couch of love in the island of Cranae was I so
enthralled by desire of you as now.” On this he led her towards the bed,
and his wife went with him.



Thus they laid themselves on the bed together; but the son of Atreus
strode among the throng, looking everywhere for Alexandrus, and no man,
neither of the Trojans nor of the allies, could find him. If they had seen
him they were in no mind to hide him, for they all of them hated him as
they did death itself. Then Agamemnon, king of men, spoke, saying, “Hear
me, Trojans, Dardanians, and allies. The victory has been with Menelaus;
therefore give back Helen with all her wealth, and pay such fine as shall
be agreed upon, in testimony among them that shall be born hereafter.”



Thus spoke the son of Atreus, and the Achaeans shouted in applause.

=== ILIAD BOOK 4 ===

A quarrel in Olympus—Minerva goes down and persuades Fandarus to
violate the oaths by wounding Menelaus with an arrow—Agamemnon makes
a speech and sends for Machaon—He then goes about among his captains
and upbraids Ulysses and Sthenelus, who each of them retort fiercely—Diomed
checks Sthenelus, and the two hosts then engage, with great slaughter on
either side.



Now the gods were sitting with Jove in council upon the golden floor while
Hebe went round pouring out nectar for them to drink, and as they pledged
one another in their cups of gold they looked down upon the town of Troy.
The son of Saturn then began to tease Juno, talking at her so as to
provoke her. “Menelaus,” said he, “has two good friends among the
goddesses, Juno of Argos, and Minerva of Alalcomene, but they only sit
still and look on, while Venus keeps ever by Alexandrus’ side to defend
him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him when he made sure that
it was all over with him—for the victory really did lie with
Menelaus. We must consider what we shall do about all this; shall we set
them fighting anew or make peace between them? If you will agree to this
last Menelaus can take back Helen and the city of Priam may remain still
inhabited.”



Minerva and Juno muttered their discontent as they sat side by side
hatching mischief for the Trojans. Minerva scowled at her father, for she
was in a furious passion with him, and said nothing, but Juno could not
contain herself. “Dread son of Saturn,” said she, “what, pray, is the
meaning of all this? Is my trouble, then, to go for nothing, and the sweat
that I have sweated, to say nothing of my horses, while getting the people
together against Priam and his children? Do as you will, but we other gods
shall not all of us approve your counsel.”



Jove was angry and answered, “My dear, what harm have Priam and his sons
done you that you are so hotly bent on sacking the city of Ilius? Will
nothing do for you but you must go within their walls and eat Priam raw, with
his sons and all the other Trojans to boot? Have it your own way then; for
I would not have this matter become a bone of contention between us. I say
further, and lay my saying to your heart, if ever I want to sack a city
belonging to friends of yours, you must not try to stop me; you will have
to let me do it, for I am giving in to you sorely against my will. Of all
inhabited cities under the sun and stars of heaven, there was none that I
so much respected as Ilius with Priam and his whole people. Equitable
feasts were never wanting about my altar, nor the savour of burning fat,
which is honour due to ourselves.”



“My own three favourite cities,” answered Juno, “are Argos, Sparta, and
Mycenae. Sack them whenever you may be displeased with them. I shall not
defend them and I shall not care. Even if I did, and tried to stay you, I
should take nothing by it, for you are much stronger than I am, but I will
not have my own work wasted. I too am a god and of the same race with
yourself. I am Saturn’s eldest daughter, and am honourable not on this
ground only, but also because I am your wife, and you are king over the
gods. Let it be a case, then, of give-and-take between us, and the rest of
the gods will follow our lead. Tell Minerva to go and take part in the
fight at once, and let her contrive that the Trojans shall be the first to
break their oaths and set upon the Achaeans.”



The sire of gods and men heeded her words, and said to Minerva, “Go at
once into the Trojan and Achaean hosts, and contrive that the Trojans
shall be the first to break their oaths and set upon the Achaeans.”



This was what Minerva was already eager to do, so down she darted from the
topmost summits of Olympus. She shot through the sky as some brilliant
meteor which the son of scheming Saturn has sent as a sign to mariners or
to some great army, and a fiery train of light follows in its wake. The
Trojans and Achaeans were struck with awe as they beheld, and one would
turn to his neighbour, saying, “Either we shall again have war and din of
combat, or Jove the lord of battle will now make peace between us.”



Thus did they converse. Then Minerva took the form of Laodocus, son of
Antenor, and went through the ranks of the Trojans to find Pandarus, the
redoubtable son of Lycaon. She found him standing among the stalwart
heroes who had followed him from the banks of the Aesopus, so she went
close up to him and said, “Brave son of Lycaon, will you do as I tell you?
If you dare send an arrow at Menelaus you will win honour and thanks from
all the Trojans, and especially from prince Alexandrus—he would be
the first to requite you very handsomely if he could see Menelaus mount
his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your hand. Take your home aim
then, and pray to Lycian Apollo, the famous archer; vow that when you get
home to your strong city of Zelea you will offer a hecatomb of firstling
lambs in his honour.”



His fool’s heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case. This
bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed as it was
bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen as the arrow
struck it to the heart. Its horns were sixteen palms long, and a worker in
horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them well down, and giving them
tips of gold. When Pandarus had strung his bow he laid it carefully on the
ground, and his brave followers held their shields before him lest the
Achaeans should set upon him before he had shot Menelaus. Then he opened
the lid of his quiver and took out a winged arrow that had not yet been
shot, fraught with the pangs of death. He laid the arrow on the string and
prayed to Lycian Apollo, the famous archer, vowing that when he got home
to his strong city of Zelea he would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs
in his honour. He laid the notch of the arrow on the ox-hide bowstring, and
drew both notch and string to his breast till the arrow-head was near the
bow; then when the bow was arched into a half-circle he let fly, and the
bow twanged, and the string sang as the arrow flew gladly on over the
heads of the throng.



But the blessed gods did not forget thee, O Menelaus, and Jove’s daughter,
driver of the spoil, was the first to stand before thee and ward off the
piercing arrow. She turned it from his skin as a mother whisks a fly from
off her child when it is sleeping sweetly; she guided it to the part where
the golden buckles of the belt that passed over his double cuirass were
fastened, so the arrow struck the belt that went tightly round him. It
went right through this and through the cuirass of cunning workmanship; it
also pierced the belt beneath it, which he wore next his skin to keep out
darts or arrows; it was this that served him in the best stead,
nevertheless the arrow went through it and grazed the top of the skin, so
that blood began flowing from the wound.



As when some woman of Meonia or Caria strains purple dye on to a piece of
ivory that is to be the cheek-piece of a horse, and is to be laid up in a
treasure house—many a knight is fain to bear it, but the king keeps
it as an ornament of which both horse and driver may be proud—even
so, O Menelaus, were your shapely thighs and your legs down to your fair
ancles stained with blood.



When King Agamemnon saw the blood flowing from the wound he was afraid,
and so was brave Menelaus himself till he saw that the barbs of the arrow
and the thread that bound the arrow-head to the shaft were still outside
the wound. Then he took heart, but Agamemnon heaved a deep sigh as he held
Menelaus’s hand in his own, and his comrades made moan in concert. “Dear
brother,” he cried, “I have been the death of you in pledging this
covenant and letting you come forward as our champion. The Trojans have
trampled on their oaths and have wounded you; nevertheless the oath, the
blood of lambs, the drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship in
which we have put our trust shall not be vain. If he that rules Olympus
fulfil it not here and now, he will yet fulfil it hereafter, and they
shall pay dearly with their lives and with their wives and children. The
day will surely come when mighty Ilius shall be laid low, with Priam and
Priam’s people, when the son of Saturn from his high throne shall
overshadow them with his awful aegis in punishment of their present
treachery. This shall surely be; but how, Menelaus, shall I mourn you, if
it be your lot now to die? I should return to Argos as a by-word, for the
Achaeans will at once go home. We shall leave Priam and the Trojans the
glory of still keeping Helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie
here at Troy with your purpose not fulfilled. Then shall some braggart
Trojan leap upon your tomb and say, ‘Ever thus may Agamemnon wreak his
vengeance; he brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land
with empty ships, and has left Menelaus behind him.’ Thus will one of them
say, and may the earth then swallow me.”



But Menelaus reassured him and said, “Take heart, and do not alarm the
people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt of
burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the belt of
mail which the bronze-smiths made me.”



And Agamemnon answered, “I trust, dear Menelaus, that it may be even so,
but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it to relieve
your pain.”



He then said to Talthybius, “Talthybius, tell Machaon, son to the great
physician, Aesculapius, to come and see Menelaus immediately. Some Trojan
or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay, and to his
own great glory.”



Talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find
Machaon. Presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had
followed him from Tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, “Son of
Aesculapius, King Agamemnon says you are to come and see Menelaus
immediately. Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to
our dismay and to his own great glory.”



Thus did he speak, and Machaon was moved to go. They passed through the
spreading host of the Achaeans and went on till they came to the place
where Menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains gathered
in a circle round him. Machaon passed into the middle of the ring and at
once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs back through the
force with which he pulled it out. He undid the burnished belt, and
beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the bronze-smiths had
made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away the blood and
applied some soothing drugs which Chiron had given to Aesculapius out of
the good will he bore him.



While they were thus busy about Menelaus, the Trojans came forward against
them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the fight.



You would not have then found Agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and unwilling
to fight, but eager rather for the fray. He left his chariot rich with
bronze and his panting steeds in charge of Eurymedon, son of Ptolemaeus
the son of Peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness against the time
his limbs should weary of going about and giving orders to so many, for he
went among the ranks on foot. When he saw men hasting to the front he
stood by them and cheered them on. “Argives,” said he, “slacken not one
whit in your onset; father Jove will be no helper of liars; the Trojans
have been the first to break their oaths and to attack us; therefore they
shall be devoured of vultures; we shall take their city and carry off
their wives and children in our ships.”



But he angrily rebuked those whom he saw shirking and disinclined to
fight. “Argives,” he cried, “cowardly miserable creatures, have you no
shame to stand here like frightened fawns who, when they can no longer
scud over the plain, huddle together, but show no fight? You are as dazed
and spiritless as deer. Would you wait till the Trojans reach the sterns
of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see whether the son of Saturn
will hold his hand over you to protect you?”



Thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. Passing through
the crowd, he came presently on the Cretans, arming round Idomeneus, who
was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while Meriones was bringing up
the battalions that were in the rear. Agamemnon was glad when he saw him,
and spoke him fairly. “Idomeneus,” said he, “I treat you with greater
distinction than I do any others of the Achaeans, whether in war or in
other things, or at table. When the princes are mixing my choicest wines
in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a fixed allowance, but your
cup is kept always full like my own, that you may drink whenever you are
minded. Go, therefore, into battle, and show yourself the man you have
been always proud to be.”



Idomeneus answered, “I will be a trusty comrade, as I promised you from
the first I would be. Urge on the other Achaeans, that we may join battle
at once, for the Trojans have trampled upon their covenants. Death and
destruction shall be theirs, seeing they have been the first to break
their oaths and to attack us.”



The son of Atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two Ajaxes
arming themselves amid a host of foot soldiers. As when a goat-herd from
some high post watches a storm drive over the deep before the west wind—black
as pitch is the offing and a mighty whirlwind draws towards him, so that
he is afraid and drives his flock into a cave—even thus did the
ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark mass to battle under the Ajaxes,
horrid with shield and spear. Glad was King Agamemnon when he saw them.
“No need,” he cried, “to give orders to such leaders of the Argives as you
are, for of your own selves you spur your men on to fight with might and
main. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo that all were so minded
as you are, for the city of Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands,
and we should sack it.”



With this he left them and went onward to Nestor, the facile speaker of
the Pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company
with Pelagon, Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, and Bias shepherd of his people.
He placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the front rank,
while the foot soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could trust, were in
the rear. The cowards he drove into the middle, that they might fight
whether they would or no. He gave his orders to the knights first, bidding
them hold their horses well in hand, so as to avoid confusion. “Let no
man,” he said, “relying on his strength or horsemanship, get before the
others and engage singly with the Trojans, nor yet let him lag behind or
you will weaken your attack; but let each when he meets an enemy’s chariot
throw his spear from his own; this be much the best; this is how the men
of old took towns and strongholds; in this wise were they minded.”



Thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight, and
King Agamemnon was glad. “I wish,” he said to him, “that your limbs were
as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but age, the
common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would that it had
fallen upon some other, and that you were still young.”



And Nestor, knight of Gerene, answered, “Son of Atreus, I too would gladly
be the man I was when I slew mighty Ereuthalion; but the gods will not
give us everything at one and the same time. I was then young, and now I
am old; still I can go with my knights and give them that counsel which
old men have a right to give. The wielding of the spear I leave to those
who are younger and stronger than myself.”



Agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found Menestheus, son of
Peteos, tarrying in his place, and with him were the Athenians loud of
tongue in battle. Near him also tarried cunning Ulysses, with his sturdy
Cephallenians round him; they had not yet heard the battle-cry, for the
ranks of Trojans and Achaeans had only just begun to move, so they were
standing still, waiting for some other columns of the Achaeans to attack
the Trojans and begin the fighting. When he saw this Agamemnon rebuked
them and said, “Son of Peteos, and you other, steeped in cunning, heart of
guile, why stand you here cowering and waiting on others? You two should
be of all men foremost when there is hard fighting to be done, for you are
ever foremost to accept my invitation when we councillors of the Achaeans
are holding feast. You are glad enough then to take your fill of roast
meats and to drink wine as long as you please, whereas now you would not
care though you saw ten columns of Achaeans engage the enemy in front of
you.”



Ulysses glared at him and answered, “Son of Atreus, what are you talking
about? How can you say that we are slack? When the Achaeans are in full
fight with the Trojans, you shall see, if you care to do so, that the
father of Telemachus will join battle with the foremost of them. You are
talking idly.”



When Agamemnon saw that Ulysses was angry, he smiled pleasantly at him and
withdrew his words. “Ulysses,” said he, “noble son of Laertes, excellent
in all good counsel, I have neither fault to find nor orders to give you,
for I know your heart is right, and that you and I are of a mind. Enough;
I will make you amends for what I have said, and if any ill has now been
spoken may the gods bring it to nothing.”



He then left them and went on to others. Presently he saw the son of
Tydeus, noble Diomed, standing by his chariot and horses, with Sthenelus
the son of Capaneus beside him; whereon he began to upbraid him. “Son of
Tydeus,” he said, “why stand you cowering here upon the brink of battle?
Tydeus did not shrink thus, but was ever ahead of his men when leading
them on against the foe—so, at least, say they that saw him in
battle, for I never set eyes upon him myself. They say that there was no
man like him. He came once to Mycenae, not as an enemy but as a guest, in
company with Polynices to recruit his forces, for they were levying war
against the strong city of Thebes, and prayed our people for a body of
picked men to help them. The men of Mycenae were willing to let them have
one, but Jove dissuaded them by showing them unfavourable omens. Tydeus,
therefore, and Polynices went their way. When they had got as far the
deep-meadowed and rush-grown banks of the Aesopus, the Achaeans sent
Tydeus as their envoy, and he found the Cadmeans gathered in great numbers
to a banquet in the house of Eteocles. Stranger though he was, he knew no
fear on finding himself single-handed among so many, but challenged them
to contests of all kinds, and in each one of them was at once victorious,
so mightily did Minerva help him. The Cadmeans were incensed at his
success, and set a force of fifty youths with two captains—the
godlike hero Maeon, son of Haemon, and Polyphontes, son of Autophonus—at
their head, to lie in wait for him on his return journey; but Tydeus slew
every man of them, save only Maeon, whom he let go in obedience to
heaven’s omens. Such was Tydeus of Aetolia. His son can talk more glibly,
but he cannot fight as his father did.”



Diomed made no answer, for he was shamed by the rebuke of Agamemnon; but
the son of Capaneus took up his words and said, “Son of Atreus, tell no
lies, for you can speak truth if you will. We boast ourselves as even
better men than our fathers; we took seven-gated Thebes, though the wall
was stronger and our men were fewer in number, for we trusted in the omens
of the gods and in the help of Jove, whereas they perished through their
own sheer folly; hold not, then, our fathers in like honour with us.”



Diomed looked sternly at him and said, “Hold your peace, my friend, as I
bid you. It is not amiss that Agamemnon should urge the Achaeans forward,
for the glory will be his if we take the city, and his the shame if we are
vanquished. Therefore let us acquit ourselves with valour.”



As he spoke he sprang from his chariot, and his armour rang so fiercely
about his body that even a brave man might well have been scared to hear
it.



As when some mighty wave that thunders on the beach when the west wind has
lashed it into fury—it has reared its head afar and now comes
crashing down on the shore; it bows its arching crest high over the jagged
rocks and spews its salt foam in all directions—even so did the
serried phalanxes of the Danaans march steadfastly to battle. The chiefs
gave orders each to his own people, but the men said never a word; no man
would think it, for huge as the host was, it seemed as though there was
not a tongue among them, so silent were they in their obedience; and as
they marched the armour about their bodies glistened in the sun. But the
clamour of the Trojan ranks was as that of many thousand ewes that stand
waiting to be milked in the yards of some rich flock-master, and bleat
incessantly in answer to the bleating of their lambs; for they had not one
speech nor language, but their tongues were diverse, and they came from
many different places. These were inspired of Mars, but the others by
Minerva—and with them came Panic, Rout, and Strife whose fury never
tires, sister and friend of murderous Mars, who, from being at first but
low in stature, grows till she uprears her head to heaven, though her feet
are still on earth. She it was that went about among them and flung down
discord to the waxing of sorrow with even hand between them.



When they were got together in one place shield clashed with shield and
spear with spear in the rage of battle. The bossed shields beat one upon
another, and there was a tramp as of a great multitude—death-cry and
shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with blood.
As torrents swollen with rain course madly down their deep channels till
the angry floods meet in some gorge, and the shepherd on the hillside
hears their roaring from afar—even such was the toil and uproar of
the hosts as they joined in battle.



First Antilochus slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Echepolus, son of
Thalysius, fighting in the foremost ranks. He struck at the projecting
part of his helmet and drove the spear into his brow; the point of bronze
pierced the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes; headlong as a tower he
fell amid the press of the fight, and as he dropped King Elephenor, son of
Chalcodon and captain of the proud Abantes began dragging him out of reach
of the darts that were falling around him, in haste to strip him of his
armour. But his purpose was not for long; Agenor saw him haling the body
away, and smote him in the side with his bronze-shod spear—for as he
stooped his side was left unprotected by his shield—and thus he
perished. Then the fight between Trojans and Achaeans grew furious over
his body, and they flew upon each other like wolves, man and man crushing
one upon the other.



Forthwith Ajax, son of Telamon, slew the fair youth Simoeisius, son of
Anthemion, whom his mother bore by the banks of the Simois, as she was
coming down from Mt. Ida, where she had been with her parents to see their
flocks. Therefore he was named Simoeisius, but he did not live to pay his
parents for his rearing, for he was cut off untimely by the spear of
mighty Ajax, who struck him in the breast by the right nipple as he was
coming on among the foremost fighters; the spear went right through his
shoulder, and he fell as a poplar that has grown straight and tall in a
meadow by some mere, and its top is thick with branches. Then the
wheelwright lays his axe to its roots that he may fashion a felloe for the
wheel of some goodly chariot, and it lies seasoning by the waterside. In
such wise did Ajax fell to earth Simoeisius, son of Anthemion. Thereon
Antiphus of the gleaming corslet, son of Priam, hurled a spear at Ajax
from amid the crowd and missed him, but he hit Leucus, the brave comrade
of Ulysses, in the groin, as he was dragging the body of Simoeisius over
to the other side; so he fell upon the body and loosed his hold upon it.
Ulysses was furious when he saw Leucus slain, and strode in full armour
through the front ranks till he was quite close; then he glared round
about him and took aim, and the Trojans fell back as he did so. His dart
was not sped in vain, for it struck Democoon, the bastard son of Priam,
who had come to him from Abydos, where he had charge of his father’s
mares. Ulysses, infuriated by the death of his comrade, hit him with his
spear on one temple, and the bronze point came through on the other side
of his forehead. Thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang
rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Hector, and they that
were in front, then gave round while the Argives raised a shout and drew
off the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. But Apollo looked
down from Pergamus and called aloud to the Trojans, for he was displeased.
“Trojans,” he cried, “rush on the foe, and do not let yourselves be thus
beaten by the Argives. Their skins are not stone nor iron that when you hit
them you do them no harm. Moreover, Achilles, the son of lovely Thetis, is
not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the ships.”



Thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while Jove’s
redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, went about among the host of the
Achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening.



Then fate fell upon Diores, son of Amarynceus, for he was struck by a
jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. He that hurled it was
Peirous, son of Imbrasus, captain of the Thracians, who had come from
Aenus; the bones and both the tendons were crushed by the pitiless stone.
He fell to the ground on his back, and in his death-throes stretched out
his hands towards his comrades. But Peirous, who had wounded him, sprang
on him and thrust a spear into his belly, so that his bowels came gushing
out upon the ground, and darkness veiled his eyes. As he was leaving the
body, Thoas of Aetolia struck him in the chest near the nipple, and the
point fixed itself in his lungs. Thoas came close up to him, pulled the
spear out of his chest, and then drawing his sword, smote him in the
middle of the belly so that he died; but he did not strip him of his
armour, for his Thracian comrades, men who wear their hair in a tuft at
the top of their heads, stood round the body and kept him off with their
long spears for all his great stature and valour; so he was driven back.
Thus the two corpses lay stretched on earth near to one another, the one
captain of the Thracians and the other of the Epeans; and many another
fell round them.



And now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have gone
about among it scatheless and unwounded, with Minerva leading him by the
hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows. For many
Trojans and Achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side face downwards
upon the earth.

=== ILIAD BOOK 5 ===

The exploits of Diomed, who, though wounded by Pandarus, continues
fighting—He kills Pandarus and wounds AEneas—Venus rescues
AEneas, but being wounded by Diomed, commits him to the care of Apollo and
goes to Olympus, where she is tended by her mother Dione—Mars
encourages the Trojans, and AEneas returns to the fight cured of his wound—Minerva
and Juno help the Achaeans, and by the advice of the former Diomed wounds
Mars, who returns to Olympus to get cured.



Then Pallas Minerva put valour into the heart of Diomed, son of Tydeus,
that he might excel all the other Argives, and cover himself with glory.
She made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like the star
that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath in the waters of
Oceanus—even such a fire did she kindle upon his head and shoulders
as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly of the fight.



Now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the Trojans, priest
of Vulcan, and his name was Dares. He had two sons, Phegeus and Idaeus,
both of them skilled in all the arts of war. These two came forward from
the main body of Trojans, and set upon Diomed, he being on foot, while
they fought from their chariot. When they were close up to one another,
Phegeus took aim first, but his spear went over Diomed’s left shoulder
without hitting him. Diomed then threw, and his spear sped not in vain,
for it hit Phegeus on the breast near the nipple, and he fell from his
chariot. Idaeus did not dare to bestride his brother’s body, but sprang
from the chariot and took to flight, or he would have shared his brother’s
fate; whereon Vulcan saved him by wrapping him in a cloud of darkness,
that his old father might not be utterly overwhelmed with grief; but the
son of Tydeus drove off with the horses, and bade his followers take them
to the ships. The Trojans were scared when they saw the two sons of Dares,
one of them in fright and the other lying dead by his chariot. Minerva,
therefore, took Mars by the hand and said, “Mars, Mars, bane of men,
blood-stained stormer of cities, may we not now leave the Trojans and
Achaeans to fight it out, and see to which of the two Jove will vouchsafe
the victory? Let us go away, and thus avoid his anger.”



So saying, she drew Mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the
steep banks of the Scamander. Upon this the Danaans drove the Trojans
back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. First King
Agamemnon flung mighty Odius, captain of the Halizoni, from his chariot.
The spear of Agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back, just as he was
turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders and went right
through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell
heavily to the ground.



Then Idomeneus killed Phaesus, son of Borus the Meonian, who had come from
Varne. Mighty Idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he was
mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as he fell
heavily from the car.



The squires of Idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while Menelaus, son of
Atreus, killed Scamandrius the son of Strophius, a mighty huntsman and
keen lover of the chase. Diana herself had taught him how to kill every
kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but neither she
nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for the spear of
Menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it struck him between
the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he fell headlong
and his armour rang rattling round him.



Meriones then killed Phereclus the son of Tecton, who was the son of
Hermon, a man whose hand was skilled in all manner of cunning workmanship,
for Pallas Minerva had dearly loved him. He it was that made the ships for
Alexandrus, which were the beginning of all mischief, and brought evil
alike both on the Trojans and on Alexandrus himself; for he heeded not the
decrees of heaven. Meriones overtook him as he was flying, and struck him
on the right buttock. The point of the spear went through the bone into
the bladder, and death came upon him as he cried aloud and fell forward on
his knees.



Meges, moreover, slew Pedaeus, son of Antenor, who, though he was a
bastard, had been brought up by Theano as one of her own children, for the
love she bore her husband. The son of Phyleus got close up to him and
drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under his tongue all
among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell dead in the dust.



And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, killed Hypsenor, the son of noble Dolopion,
who had been made priest of the river Scamander, and was honoured among
the people as though he were a god. Eurypylus gave him chase as he was
flying before him, smote him with his sword upon the arm, and lopped his
strong hand from off it. The bloody hand fell to the ground, and the
shades of death, with fate that no man can withstand, came over his eyes.



Thus furiously did the battle rage between them. As for the son of Tydeus,
you could not say whether he was more among the Achaeans or the Trojans.
He rushed across the plain like a winter torrent that has burst its
barrier in full flood; no dykes, no walls of fruitful vineyards can embank
it when it is swollen with rain from heaven, but in a moment it comes
tearing onward, and lays many a field waste that many a strong man’s hand
has reclaimed—even so were the dense phalanxes of the Trojans driven
in rout by the son of Tydeus, and many though they were, they dared not
abide his onslaught.



Now when the son of Lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving the
Trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front part of
his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through the metal and
pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with blood. On this the
son of Lycaon shouted in triumph, “Knights Trojans, come on; the bravest
of the Achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold out much longer if King
Apollo was indeed with me when I sped from Lycia hither.”



Thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed Diomed, who withdrew and
made for the chariot and horses of Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus. “Dear
son of Capaneus,” said he, “come down from your chariot, and draw the
arrow out of my shoulder.”



Sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound,
whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been made in
his shirt. Then Diomed prayed, saying, “Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing
Jove, unweariable, if ever you loved my father well and stood by him in
the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant me to come within a
spear’s throw of that man and kill him. He has been too quick for me and
has wounded me; and now he is boasting that I shall not see the light of
the sun much longer.”



Thus he prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard him; she made his limbs supple
and quickened his hands and his feet. Then she went up close to him and
said, “Fear not, Diomed, to do battle with the Trojans, for I have set in
your heart the spirit of your knightly father Tydeus. Moreover, I have
withdrawn the veil from your eyes, that you know gods and men apart. If,
then, any other god comes here and offers you battle, do not fight him;
but should Jove’s daughter Venus come, strike her with your spear and
wound her.”



When she had said this Minerva went away, and the son of Tydeus again took
his place among the foremost fighters, three times more fierce even than
he had been before. He was like a lion that some mountain shepherd has
wounded, but not killed, as he is springing over the wall of a sheep-yard
to attack the sheep. The shepherd has roused the brute to fury but cannot
defend his flock, so he takes shelter under cover of the buildings, while
the sheep, panic-stricken on being deserted, are smothered in heaps one on
top of the other, and the angry lion leaps out over the sheep-yard wall.
Even thus did Diomed go furiously about among the Trojans.



He killed Astynous, and Hypeiron shepherd of his people, the one with a
thrust of his spear, which struck him above the nipple, the other with a
sword-cut on the collar-bone, that severed his shoulder from his neck and
back. He let both of them lie, and went in pursuit of Abas and Polyidus,
sons of the old reader of dreams Eurydamas: they never came back for him
to read them any more dreams, for mighty Diomed made an end of them. He
then gave chase to Xanthus and Thoon, the two sons of Phaenops, both of
them very dear to him, for he was now worn out with age, and begat no more
sons to inherit his possessions. But Diomed took both their lives and left
their father sorrowing bitterly, for he nevermore saw them come home from
battle alive, and his kinsmen divided his wealth among themselves.



Then he came upon two sons of Priam, Echemmon and Chromius, as they were
both in one chariot. He sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the neck of
some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. For all their
vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and stripped the
armour from their bodies. Then he gave their horses to his comrades to
take them back to the ships.



When Aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through the
fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find Pandarus. When he
had found the brave son of Lycaon he said, “Pandarus, where is now your
bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer, in respect of which
no man here can rival you nor is there any in Lycia that can beat you?
Lift then your hands to Jove and send an arrow at this fellow who is going
so masterfully about, and has done such deadly work among the Trojans. He
has killed many a brave man—unless indeed he is some god who is
angry with the Trojans about their sacrifices, and has set his hand
against them in his displeasure.”



And the son of Lycaon answered, “Aeneas, I take him for none other than
the son of Tydeus. I know him by his shield, the visor of his helmet, and
by his horses. It is possible that he may be a god, but if he is the man I
say he is, he is not making all this havoc without heaven’s help, but has
some god by his side who is shrouded in a cloud of darkness, and who
turned my arrow aside when it had hit him. I have taken aim at him already
and hit him on the right shoulder; my arrow went through the breast-piece
of his cuirass; and I made sure I should send him hurrying to the world
below, but it seems that I have not killed him. There must be a god who is
angry with me. Moreover I have neither horse nor chariot. In my father’s
stables there are eleven excellent chariots, fresh from the builder, quite
new, with cloths spread over them; and by each of them there stand a pair
of horses, champing barley and rye; my old father Lycaon urged me again
and again when I was at home and on the point of starting, to take
chariots and horses with me that I might lead the Trojans in battle, but I
would not listen to him; it would have been much better if I had done so,
but I was thinking about the horses, which had been used to eat their
fill, and I was afraid that in such a great gathering of men they might be
ill-fed, so I left them at home and came on foot to Ilius armed only with
my bow and arrows. These it seems, are of no use, for I have already hit
two chieftains, the sons of Atreus and of Tydeus, and though I drew blood
surely enough, I have only made them still more furious. I did ill to take
my bow down from its peg on the day I led my band of Trojans to Ilius in
Hector’s service, and if ever I get home again to set eyes on my native
place, my wife, and the greatness of my house, may some one cut my head
off then and there if I do not break the bow and set it on a hot fire—such
pranks as it plays me.”



Aeneas answered, “Say no more. Things will not mend till we two go against
this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial of arms. Mount
my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of Tros can speed hither and
thither over the plain in pursuit or flight. If Jove again vouchsafes
glory to the son of Tydeus they will carry us safely back to the city.
Take hold, then, of the whip and reins while I stand upon the car to
fight, or else do you wait this man’s onset while I look after the
horses.”



“Aeneas,” replied the son of Lycaon, “take the reins and drive; if we have
to fly before the son of Tydeus the horses will go better for their own
driver. If they miss the sound of your voice when they expect it they may
be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the fight. The son of Tydeus
will then kill both of us and take the horses. Therefore drive them
yourself and I will be ready for him with my spear.”



They then mounted the chariot and drove full speed towards the son of
Tydeus. Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, saw them coming and said to Diomed,
“Diomed, son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, I see two heroes speeding
towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful archer, Pandarus
son of Lycaon, the other, Aeneas, whose sire is Anchises, while his mother
is Venus. Mount the chariot and let us retreat. Do not, I pray you, press
so furiously forward, or you may get killed.”



Diomed looked angrily at him and answered: “Talk not of flight, for I
shall not listen to you: I am of a race that knows neither flight nor
fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. I am in no mind to mount, but
will go against them even as I am; Pallas Minerva bids me be afraid of no
man, and even though one of them escape, their steeds shall not take both
back again. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart—if
Minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both, stay your
horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot; then be
sure you spring Aeneas’ horses and drive them from the Trojan to the
Achaean ranks. They are of the stock that great Jove gave to Tros in
payment for his son Ganymede, and are the finest that live and move under
the sun. King Anchises stole the blood by putting his mares to them
without Laomedon’s knowledge, and they bore him six foals. Four are still
in his stables, but he gave the other two to Aeneas. We shall win great
glory if we can take them.”



Thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up to them,
and the son of Lycaon spoke first. “Great and mighty son,” said he, “of
noble Tydeus, my arrow failed to lay you low, so I will now try with my
spear.”



He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it from him. It struck the
shield of the son of Tydeus; the bronze point pierced it and passed on
till it reached the breastplate. Thereon the son of Lycaon shouted out and
said, “You are hit clean through the belly; you will not stand out for
long, and the glory of the fight is mine.”



But Diomed all undismayed made answer, “You have missed, not hit, and
before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you shall glut
tough-shielded Mars with his blood.”



With this he hurled his spear, and Minerva guided it on to Pandarus’s nose
near the eye. It went crashing in among his white teeth; the bronze point
cut through the root of his tongue, coming out under his chin, and his
glistening armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the
ground. The horses started aside for fear, and he was reft of life and
strength.



Aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing lest
the Achaeans should carry off the body. He bestrode it as a lion in the
pride of strength, with shield and spear before him and a cry of battle on
his lips resolute to kill the first that should dare face him. But the son
of Tydeus caught up a mighty stone, so huge and great that as men now are
it would take two to lift it; nevertheless he bore it aloft with ease
unaided, and with this he struck Aeneas on the groin where the hip turns
in the joint that is called the “cup-bone.” The stone crushed this joint,
and broke both the sinews, while its jagged edges tore away all the flesh.
The hero fell on his knees, and propped himself with his hand resting on
the ground till the darkness of night fell upon his eyes. And now Aeneas,
king of men, would have perished then and there, had not his mother,
Jove’s daughter Venus, who had conceived him by Anchises when he was
herding cattle, been quick to mark, and thrown her two white arms about
the body of her dear son. She protected him by covering him with a fold of
her own fair garment, lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his
breast and kill him.



Thus, then, did she bear her dear son out of the fight. But the son of
Capaneus was not unmindful of the orders that Diomed had given him. He
made his own horses fast, away from the hurly-burly, by binding the reins
to the rim of the chariot. Then he sprang upon Aeneas’s horses and drove
them from the Trojan to the Achaean ranks. When he had so done he gave
them over to his chosen comrade Deipylus, whom he valued above all others
as the one who was most like-minded with himself, to take them on to the
ships. He then remounted his own chariot, seized the reins, and drove with
all speed in search of the son of Tydeus.



Now the son of Tydeus was in pursuit of the Cyprian goddess, spear in
hand, for he knew her to be feeble and not one of those goddesses that can
lord it among men in battle like Minerva or Enyo the waster of cities, and
when at last after a long chase he caught her up, he flew at her and
thrust his spear into the flesh of her delicate hand. The point tore
through the ambrosial robe which the Graces had woven for her, and pierced
the skin between her wrist and the palm of her hand, so that the immortal
blood, or ichor, that flows in the veins of the blessed gods, came pouring
from the wound; for the gods do not eat bread nor drink wine, hence they
have no blood such as ours, and are immortal. Venus screamed aloud, and
let her son fall, but Phoebus Apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him
in a cloud of darkness, lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his
breast and kill him; and Diomed shouted out as he left her, “Daughter of
Jove, leave war and battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling
silly women? If you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you
shudder at the very name of war.”



The goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and Iris, fleet as the wind,
drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all besmirched.
She found fierce Mars waiting on the left of the battle, with his spear
and his two fleet steeds resting on a cloud; whereon she fell on her knees
before her brother and implored him to let her have his horses. “Dear
brother,” she cried, “save me, and give me your horses to take me to
Olympus where the gods dwell. I am badly wounded by a mortal, the son of
Tydeus, who would now fight even with father Jove.”



Thus she spoke, and Mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. She mounted
the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while Iris sat beside her and took
the reins in her hand. She lashed her horses on and they flew forward
nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high Olympus, where the gods
have their dwelling. There she stayed them, unloosed them from the
chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but Venus flung herself on
to the lap of her mother Dione, who threw her arms about her and caressed
her, saying, “Which of the heavenly beings has been treating you in this
way, as though you had been doing something wrong in the face of day?”



And laughter-loving Venus answered, “Proud Diomed, the son of Tydeus,
wounded me because I was bearing my dear son Aeneas, whom I love best of
all mankind, out of the fight. The war is no longer one between Trojans
and Achaeans, for the Danaans have now taken to fighting with the
immortals.”



“Bear it, my child,” replied Dione, “and make the best of it. We dwellers
in Olympus have to put up with much at the hands of men, and we lay much
suffering on one another. Mars had to suffer when Otus and Ephialtes,
children of Aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, so that he lay thirteen
months imprisoned in a vessel of bronze. Mars would have then perished had
not fair Eeriboea, stepmother to the sons of Aloeus, told Mercury, who
stole him away when he was already well-nigh worn out by the severity of
his bondage. Juno, again, suffered when the mighty son of Amphitryon
wounded her on the right breast with a three-barbed arrow, and nothing
could assuage her pain. So, also, did huge Hades, when this same man, the
son of aegis-bearing Jove, hit him with an arrow even at the gates of
hell, and hurt him badly. Thereon Hades went to the house of Jove on great
Olympus, angry and full of pain; and the arrow in his brawny shoulder
caused him great anguish till Paeeon healed him by spreading soothing
herbs on the wound, for Hades was not of mortal mould. Daring,
headstrong, evildoer who recked not of his sin in shooting the gods that
dwell in Olympus. And now Minerva has egged this son of Tydeus on against
yourself, fool that he is for not reflecting that no man who fights with
gods will live long or hear his children prattling about his knees when he
returns from battle. Let, then, the son of Tydeus see that he does not
have to fight with one who is stronger than you are. Then shall his brave
wife Aegialeia, daughter of Adrestus, rouse her whole house from sleep,
wailing for the loss of her wedded lord, Diomed the bravest of the
Achaeans.”



So saying, she wiped the ichor from the wrist of her daughter with both
hands, whereon the pain left her, and her hand was healed. But Minerva and
Juno, who were looking on, began to taunt Jove with their mocking talk,
and Minerva was first to speak. “Father Jove,” said she, “do not be angry
with me, but I think the Cyprian must have been persuading some one of the
Achaean women to go with the Trojans of whom she is so very fond, and
while caressing one or other of them she must have torn her delicate hand
with the gold pin of the woman’s brooch.”



The sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden Venus to his side. “My
child,” said he, “it has not been given you to be a warrior. Attend,
henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and leave all this
fighting to Mars and to Minerva.”



Thus did they converse. But Diomed sprang upon Aeneas, though he knew him
to be in the very arms of Apollo. Not one whit did he fear the mighty god,
so set was he on killing Aeneas and stripping him of his armour. Thrice
did he spring forward with might and main to slay him, and thrice did
Apollo beat back his gleaming shield. When he was coming on for the fourth
time, as though he were a god, Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice
and said, “Take heed, son of Tydeus, and draw off; think not to match
yourself against gods, for men that walk the earth cannot hold their own
with the immortals.”



The son of Tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger of
the god, while Apollo took Aeneas out of the crowd and set him in sacred
Pergamus, where his temple stood. There, within the mighty sanctuary,
Latona and Diana healed him and made him glorious to behold, while Apollo
of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of Aeneas, and armed
as he was. Round this the Trojans and Achaeans hacked at the bucklers
about one another’s breasts, hewing each other’s round shields and light
hide-covered targets. Then Phoebus Apollo said to Mars, “Mars, Mars, bane
of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can you not go to this man, the
son of Tydeus, who would now fight even with father Jove, and draw him out
of the battle? He first went up to the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand
near her wrist, and afterwards sprang upon me too, as though he were a
god.”



He then took his seat on the top of Pergamus, while murderous Mars went
about among the ranks of the Trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness of
fleet Acamas chief of the Thracians. “Sons of Priam,” said he, “how long
will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the Achaeans? Would you
wait till they are at the walls of Troy? Aeneas the son of Anchises has
fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as Hector himself. Help me,
then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of the fight.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Then Sarpedon
rebuked Hector very sternly. “Hector,” said he, “where is your prowess
now? You used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you
could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. I see
not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it is we, your
allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. I have come from afar, even from
Lycia and the banks of the river Xanthus, where I have left my wife, my
infant son, and much wealth to tempt whoever is needy; nevertheless, I
head my Lycian soldiers and stand my ground against any who would fight me
though I have nothing here for the Achaeans to plunder, while you look on,
without even bidding your men stand firm in defence of their wives. See
that you fall not into the hands of your foes as men caught in the meshes
of a net, and they sack your fair city forthwith. Keep this before your
mind night and day, and beseech the captains of your allies to hold on
without flinching, and thus put away their reproaches from you.”



So spoke Sarpedon, and Hector smarted under his words. He sprang from his
chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host
brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising the
terrible cry of battle. Then they rallied and again faced the Achaeans,
but the Argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven back. As the
breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when men
are winnowing—while yellow Ceres blows with the wind to sift the
chaff from the grain, and the chaff-heaps grow whiter and whiter—even
so did the Achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses’ hoofs raised to
the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them back to battle, and
they bore down with might upon the foe. Fierce Mars, to help the Trojans,
covered them in a veil of darkness, and went about everywhere among them,
inasmuch as Phoebus Apollo had told him that when he saw Pallas Minerva
leave the fray he was to put courage into the hearts of the Trojans—for
it was she who was helping the Danaans. Then Apollo sent Aeneas forth from
his rich sanctuary, and filled his heart with valour, whereon he took his
place among his comrades, who were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound,
and of a good courage; but they could not ask him how it had all happened,
for they were too busy with the turmoil raised by Mars and by Strife, who
raged insatiably in their midst.



The two Ajaxes, Ulysses and Diomed, cheered the Danaans on, fearless of
the fury and onset of the Trojans. They stood as still as clouds which the
son of Saturn has spread upon the mountain tops when there is no air and
fierce Boreas sleeps with the other boisterous winds whose shrill blasts
scatter the clouds in all directions—even so did the Danaans stand
firm and unflinching against the Trojans. The son of Atreus went about
among them and exhorted them. “My friends,” said he, “quit yourselves like
brave men, and shun dishonour in one another’s eyes amid the stress of
battle. They that shun dishonour more often live than get killed, but they
that fly save neither life nor name.”



As he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the front
rank, the comrade of Aeneas, Deicoon son of Pergasus, whom the Trojans
held in no less honour than the sons of Priam, for he was ever quick to
place himself among the foremost. The spear of King Agamemnon struck his
shield and went right through it, for the shield stayed it not. It drove
through his belt into the lower part of his belly, and his armour rang
rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.



Then Aeneas killed two champions of the Danaans, Crethon and Orsilochus.
Their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of Phere and was
descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad stream flows through the
land of the Pylians. The river begat Orsilochus, who ruled over much
people and was father to Diocles, who in his turn begat twin sons, Crethon
and Orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war. These, when they grew
up, went to Ilius with the Argive fleet in the cause of Menelaus and
Agamemnon sons of Atreus, and there they both of them fell. As two lions
whom their dam has reared in the depths of some mountain forest to plunder
homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle till they get killed by the hand
of man, so were these two vanquished by Aeneas, and fell like high
pine-trees to the ground.



Brave Menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the front,
clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for Mars egged him on
to do so with intent that he should be killed by Aeneas; but Antilochus
the son of Nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing that the king might
come to harm and thus bring all their labour to nothing; when, therefore
Aeneas and Menelaus were setting their hands and spears against one
another eager to do battle, Antilochus placed himself by the side of
Menelaus. Aeneas, bold though he was, drew back on seeing the two heroes
side by side in front of him, so they drew the bodies of Crethon and
Orsilochus to the ranks of the Achaeans and committed the two poor fellows
into the hands of their comrades. They then turned back and fought in the
front ranks.



They killed Pylaemenes peer of Mars, leader of the Paphlagonian warriors.
Menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on his chariot,
while Antilochus hit his charioteer and squire Mydon, the son of Atymnius,
who was turning his horses in flight. He hit him with a stone upon the
elbow, and the reins, enriched with white ivory, fell from his hands into
the dust. Antilochus rushed towards him and struck him on the temples with
his sword, whereon he fell head first from the chariot to the ground.
There he stood for a while with his head and shoulders buried deep in the
dust—for he had fallen on sandy soil till his horses kicked him and
laid him flat on the ground, as Antilochus lashed them and drove them off
to the host of the Achaeans.



But Hector marked them from across the ranks, and with a loud cry rushed
towards them, followed by the strong battalions of the Trojans. Mars and
dread Enyo led them on, she fraught with ruthless turmoil of battle, while
Mars wielded a monstrous spear, and went about, now in front of Hector and
now behind him.



Diomed shook with passion as he saw them. As a man crossing a wide plain
is dismayed to find himself on the brink of some great river rolling
swiftly to the sea—he sees its boiling waters and starts back in
fear—even so did the son of Tydeus give ground. Then he said to his
men, “My friends, how can we wonder that Hector wields the spear so well?
Some god is ever by his side to protect him, and now Mars is with him in
the likeness of mortal man. Keep your faces therefore towards the Trojans,
but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight with gods.”



As he spoke the Trojans drew close up, and Hector killed two men, both in
one chariot, Menesthes and Anchialus, heroes well versed in war. Ajax son
of Telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close up and hurled his
spear, hitting Amphius the son of Selagus, a man of great wealth who lived
in Paesus and owned much corn-growing land, but his lot had led him to
come to the aid of Priam and his sons. Ajax struck him in the belt; the
spear pierced the lower part of his belly, and he fell heavily to the
ground. Then Ajax ran towards him to strip him of his armour, but the
Trojans rained spears upon him, many of which fell upon his shield. He
planted his heel upon the body and drew out his spear, but the darts
pressed so heavily upon him that he could not strip the goodly armour from
his shoulders. The Trojan chieftains, moreover, many and valiant, came
about him with their spears, so that he dared not stay; great, brave and
valiant though he was, they drove him from them and he was beaten back.



Thus, then, did the battle rage between them. Presently the strong hand of
fate impelled Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules, a man both brave and of
great stature, to fight Sarpedon; so the two, son and grandson of great
Jove, drew near to one another, and Tlepolemus spoke first. “Sarpedon,”
said he, “councillor of the Lycians, why should you come skulking here you
who are a man of peace? They lie who call you son of aegis-bearing Jove,
for you are little like those who were of old his children. Far other was
Hercules, my own brave and lion-hearted father, who came here for the
horses of Laomedon, and though he had six ships only, and few men to
follow him, sacked the city of Ilius and made a wilderness of her
highways. You are a coward, and your people are falling from you. For all
your strength, and all your coming from Lycia, you will be no help to the
Trojans but will pass the gates of Hades vanquished by my hand.”



And Sarpedon, captain of the Lycians, answered, “Tlepolemus, your father
overthrew Ilius by reason of Laomedon’s folly in refusing payment to one
who had served him well. He would not give your father the horses which he
had come so far to fetch. As for yourself, you shall meet death by my
spear. You shall yield glory to myself, and your soul to Hades of the
noble steeds.”



Thus spoke Sarpedon, and Tlepolemus upraised his spear. They threw at the
same moment, and Sarpedon struck his foe in the middle of his throat; the
spear went right through, and the darkness of death fell upon his eyes.
Tlepolemus’s spear struck Sarpedon on the left thigh with such force that
it tore through the flesh and grazed the bone, but his father as yet
warded off destruction from him.



His comrades bore Sarpedon out of the fight, in great pain by the weight
of the spear that was dragging from his wound. They were in such haste and
stress as they bore him that no one thought of drawing the spear from his
thigh so as to let him walk uprightly. Meanwhile the Achaeans carried off
the body of Tlepolemus, whereon Ulysses was moved to pity, and panted for
the fray as he beheld them. He doubted whether to pursue the son of Jove,
or to make slaughter of the Lycian rank and file; it was not decreed,
however, that he should slay the son of Jove; Minerva, therefore, turned
him against the main body of the Lycians. He killed Coeranus, Alastor,
Chromius, Alcandrus, Halius, Noemon, and Prytanis, and would have slain
yet more, had not great Hector marked him, and sped to the front of the
fight clad in his suit of mail, filling the Danaans with terror. Sarpedon
was glad when he saw him coming, and besought him, saying, “Son of Priam,
let me not be here to fall into the hands of the Danaans. Help me, and
since I may not return home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my
infant son, let me die within the walls of your city.”



Hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the
Achaeans and kill many among them. His comrades then bore Sarpedon away
and laid him beneath Jove’s spreading oak tree. Pelagon, his friend and
comrade, drew the spear out of his thigh, but Sarpedon fainted and a mist
came over his eyes. Presently he came to himself again, for the breath of
the north wind as it played upon him gave him new life, and brought him
out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen.



Meanwhile the Argives were neither driven towards their ships by Mars and
Hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that Mars was with
the Trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned towards the
foe. Who, then, was first and who last to be slain by Mars and Hector?
They were valiant Teuthras, and Orestes the renowned charioteer, Trechus
the Aetolian warrior, Oenomaus, Helenus the son of Oenops, and Oresbius of
the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great wealth, and dwelt by the
Cephisian lake with the other Boeotians who lived near him, owners of a
fertile country.



Now when the goddess Juno saw the Argives thus falling, she said to
Minerva, “Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, the promise
we made Menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked the city of
Ilius will be of no effect if we let Mars rage thus furiously. Let us go
into the fray at once.”



Minerva did not gainsay her. Thereon the august goddess, daughter of great
Saturn, began to harness her gold-bedizened steeds. Hebe with all speed
fitted on the eight-spoked wheels of bronze that were on either side of
the iron axle-tree. The felloes of the wheels were of gold, imperishable,
and over these there was a tire of bronze, wondrous to behold. The naves
of the wheels were silver, turning round the axle upon either side. The
car itself was made with plaited bands of gold and silver, and it had a
double top-rail running all round it. From the body of the car there went
a pole of silver, on to the end of which she bound the golden yoke, with
the bands of gold that were to go under the necks of the horses. Then Juno
put her steeds under the yoke, eager for battle and the war-cry.



Meanwhile Minerva flung her richly embroidered vesture, made with her own
hands, on to her father’s threshold, and donned the shirt of Jove, arming
herself for battle. She threw her tasselled aegis about her shoulders,
wreathed round with Rout as with a fringe, and on it were Strife, and
Strength, and Panic whose blood runs cold; moreover there was the head of
the dread monster Gorgon, grim and awful to behold, portent of
aegis-bearing Jove. On her head she set her helmet of gold, with four
plumes, and coming to a peak both in front and behind—decked with
the emblems of a hundred cities; then she stepped into her flaming chariot
and grasped the spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, with which she
quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno lashed the horses
on, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open of their own accord—gates
over which the Hours preside, in whose hands are Heaven and Olympus,
either to open the dense cloud that hides them, or to close it. Through
these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds, and found the son of
Saturn sitting all alone on the topmost ridges of Olympus. There Juno
stayed her horses, and spoke to Jove the son of Saturn, lord of all.
“Father Jove,” said she, “are you not angry with Mars for these high
doings? how great and goodly a host of the Achaeans he has destroyed to my
great grief, and without either right or reason, while the Cyprian and
Apollo are enjoying it all at their ease and setting this unrighteous
madman on to do further mischief. I hope, Father Jove, that you will not
be angry if I hit Mars hard, and chase him out of the battle.”



And Jove answered, “Set Minerva on to him, for she punishes him more often
than any one else does.”



Juno did as he had said. She lashed her horses, and they flew forward
nothing loth midway betwixt earth and sky. As far as a man can see when he
looks out upon the sea from some high beacon, so far can the loud-neighing
horses of the gods spring at a single bound. When they reached Troy and
the place where its two flowing streams Simois and Scamander meet, there
Juno stayed them and took them from the chariot. She hid them in a thick
cloud, and Simois made ambrosia spring up for them to eat; the two
goddesses then went on, flying like turtledoves in their eagerness to help
the Argives. When they came to the part where the bravest and most in
number were gathered about mighty Diomed, fighting like lions or wild
boars of great strength and endurance, there Juno stood still and raised a
shout like that of brazen-voiced Stentor, whose cry was as loud as that of
fifty men together. “Argives,” she cried; “shame on cowardly creatures,
brave in semblance only; as long as Achilles was fighting, if his spear
was so deadly that the Trojans dared not show themselves outside the
Dardanian gates, but now they sally far from the city and fight even at
your ships.”



With these words she put heart and soul into them all, while Minerva
sprang to the side of the son of Tydeus, whom she found near his chariot
and horses, cooling the wound that Pandarus had given him. For the sweat
caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield irritated the hurt:
his arm was weary with pain, and he was lifting up the strap to wipe away
the blood. The goddess laid her hand on the yoke of his horses and said,
“The son of Tydeus is not such another as his father. Tydeus was a little
man, but he could fight, and rushed madly into the fray even when I told
him not to do so. When he went all unattended as envoy to the city of
Thebes among the Cadmeans, I bade him feast in their houses and be at
peace; but with that high spirit which was ever present with him, he
challenged the youth of the Cadmeans, and at once beat them in all that he
attempted, so mightily did I help him. I stand by you too to protect you,
and I bid you be instant in fighting the Trojans; but either you are tired
out, or you are afraid and out of heart, and in that case I say that you
are no true son of Tydeus the son of Oeneus.”



Diomed answered, “I know you, goddess, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, and
will hide nothing from you. I am not afraid nor out of heart, nor is there
any slackness in me. I am only following your own instructions; you told
me not to fight any of the blessed gods; but if Jove’s daughter Venus came
into battle I was to wound her with my spear. Therefore I am retreating,
and bidding the other Argives gather in this place, for I know that Mars
is now lording it in the field.”



“Diomed, son of Tydeus,” replied Minerva, “man after my own heart, fear
neither Mars nor any other of the immortals, for I will befriend you. Nay,
drive straight at Mars, and smite him in close combat; fear not this
raging madman, villain incarnate, first on one side and then on the other.
But now he was holding talk with Juno and myself, saying he would help the
Argives and attack the Trojans; nevertheless he is with the Trojans, and
has forgotten the Argives.”



With this she caught hold of Sthenelus and lifted him off the chariot on
to the ground. In a second he was on the ground, whereupon the goddess
mounted the car and placed herself by the side of Diomed. The oaken axle
groaned aloud under the burden of the awful goddess and the hero; Pallas
Minerva took the whip and reins, and drove straight at Mars. He was in the
act of stripping huge Periphas, son of Ochesius and bravest of the
Aetolians. Bloody Mars was stripping him of his armour, and Minerva donned
the helmet of Hades, that he might not see her; when, therefore, he saw
Diomed, he made straight for him and let Periphas lie where he had fallen.
As soon as they were at close quarters he let fly with his bronze spear
over the reins and yoke, thinking to take Diomed’s life, but Minerva
caught the spear in her hand and made it fly harmlessly over the chariot.
Diomed then threw, and Pallas Minerva drove the spear into the pit of
Mars’s stomach where his under-girdle went round him. There Diomed wounded
him, tearing his fair flesh and then drawing his spear out again. Mars
roared as loudly as nine or ten thousand men in the thick of a fight, and
the Achaeans and Trojans were struck with panic, so terrible was the cry
he raised.



As a dark cloud in the sky when it comes on to blow after heat, even so
did Diomed son of Tydeus see Mars ascend into the broad heavens. With all
speed he reached high Olympus, home of the gods, and in great pain sat
down beside Jove the son of Saturn. He showed Jove the immortal blood that
was flowing from his wound, and spoke piteously, saying, “Father Jove, are
you not angered by such doings? We gods are continually suffering in the
most cruel manner at one another’s hands while helping mortals; and we all
owe you a grudge for having begotten that mad termagant of a daughter, who
is always committing outrage of some kind. We other gods must all do as
you bid us, but her you neither scold nor punish; you encourage her
because the pestilent creature is your daughter. See how she has been
inciting proud Diomed to vent his rage on the immortal gods. First he went
up to the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and then he
sprang upon me too as though he were a god. Had I not run for it I must
either have lain there for long enough in torments among the ghastly
corpses, or have been eaten alive with spears till I had no more strength
left in me.”



Jove looked angrily at him and said, “Do not come whining here, Sir
Facing-both-ways. I hate you worst of all the gods in Olympus, for you are
ever fighting and making mischief. You have the intolerable and stubborn
spirit of your mother Juno: it is all I can do to manage her, and it is
her doing that you are now in this plight: still, I cannot let you remain
longer in such great pain; you are my own offspring, and it was by me that
your mother conceived you; if, however, you had been the son of any other
god, you are so destructive that by this time you should have been lying
lower than the Titans.”



He then bade Paeeon heal him, whereon Paeeon spread pain-killing herbs
upon his wound and cured him, for he was not of mortal mould. As the juice
of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though it is
liquid, even so instantly did Paeeon cure fierce Mars. Then Hebe washed
him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by his father
Jove all glorious to behold.



But Juno of Argos and Minerva of Alalcomene, now that they had put a stop
to the murderous doings of Mars, went back again to the house of Jove.

=== ILIAD BOOK 6 ===

Glaucus and Diomed—The story of Bellerophon—Hector and
Andromache.



The fight between Trojans and Achaeans was now left to rage as it would,
and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain as they aimed
their bronze-shod spears at one another between the streams of Simois and
Xanthus.



First, Ajax son of Telamon, tower of strength to the Achaeans, broke a
phalanx of the Trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades by
killing Acamas son of Eussorus, the best man among the Thracians, being
both brave and of great stature. The spear struck the projecting peak of
his helmet: its bronze point then went through his forehead into the
brain, and darkness veiled his eyes.



Then Diomed killed Axylus son of Teuthranus, a rich man who lived in the
strong city of Arisbe, and was beloved by all men; for he had a house by
the roadside, and entertained every one who passed; howbeit not one of his
guests stood before him to save his life, and Diomed killed both him and
his squire Calesius, who was then his charioteer—so the pair passed
beneath the earth.



Euryalus killed Dresus and Opheltius, and then went in pursuit of Aesepus
and Pedasus, whom the naiad nymph Abarbarea had borne to noble Bucolion.
Bucolion was eldest son to Laomedon, but he was a bastard. While tending
his sheep he had converse with the nymph, and she conceived twin sons;
these the son of Mecisteus now slew, and he stripped the armour from their
shoulders. Polypoetes then killed Astyalus, Ulysses Pidytes of Percote,
and Teucer Aretaon. Ablerus fell by the spear of Nestor’s son Antilochus,
and Agamemnon, king of men, killed Elatus who dwelt in Pedasus by the
banks of the river Satnioeis. Leitus killed Phylacus as he was flying, and
Eurypylus slew Melanthus.



Then Menelaus of the loud war-cry took Adrestus alive, for his horses ran
into a tamarisk bush, as they were flying wildly over the plain, and broke
the pole from the car; they went on towards the city along with the others
in full flight, but Adrestus rolled out, and fell in the dust flat on his
face by the wheel of his chariot; Menelaus came up to him spear in hand,
but Adrestus caught him by the knees begging for his life. “Take me
alive,” he cried, “son of Atreus, and you shall have a full ransom for me:
my father is rich and has much treasure of gold, bronze, and wrought iron
laid by in his house. From this store he will give you a large ransom
should he hear of my being alive and at the ships of the Achaeans.”



Thus did he plead, and Menelaus was for yielding and giving him to a
squire to take to the ships of the Achaeans, but Agamemnon came running up
to him and rebuked him. “My good Menelaus,” said he, “this is no time for
giving quarter. Has, then, your house fared so well at the hands of the
Trojans? Let us not spare a single one of them—not even the child
unborn and in its mother’s womb; let not a man of them be left alive, but
let all in Ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten.”



Thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words
were just. Menelaus, therefore, thrust Adrestus from him, whereon King
Agamemnon struck him in the flank, and he fell: then the son of Atreus
planted his foot upon his breast to draw his spear from the body.



Meanwhile Nestor shouted to the Argives, saying, “My friends, Danaan
warriors, servants of Mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead, and
bring back much booty to the ships. Let us kill as many as we can; the
bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at your
leisure.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all. And now the Trojans
would have been routed and driven back into Ilius, had not Priam’s son
Helenus, wisest of augurs, said to Hector and Aeneas, “Hector and Aeneas,
you two are the mainstays of the Trojans and Lycians, for you are foremost
at all times, alike in fight and counsel; hold your ground here, and go
about among the host to rally them in front of the gates, or they will
fling themselves into the arms of their wives, to the great joy of our
foes. Then, when you have put heart into all our companies, we will stand
firm here and fight the Danaans however hard they press us, for there is
nothing else to be done. Meanwhile do you, Hector, go to the city and tell
our mother what is happening. Tell her to bid the matrons gather at the
temple of Minerva in the acropolis; let her then take her key and open the
doors of the sacred building; there, upon the knees of Minerva, let her
lay the largest, fairest robe she has in her house—the one she sets
most store by; let her, moreover, promise to sacrifice twelve yearling
heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the goddess,
if she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little ones of the
Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from falling on the goodly city of
Ilius; for he fights with fury and fills men’s souls with panic. I hold
him mightiest of them all; we did not fear even their great champion
Achilles, son of a goddess though he be, as we do this man: his rage is
beyond all bounds, and there is none can vie with him in prowess.”



Hector did as his brother bade him. He sprang from his chariot, and went
about everywhere among the host, brandishing his spears, urging the men on
to fight, and raising the dread cry of battle. Thereon they rallied and
again faced the Achaeans, who gave ground and ceased their murderous
onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals had come down from
starry heaven to help the Trojans, so strangely had they rallied. And
Hector shouted to the Trojans, “Trojans and allies, be men, my friends,
and fight with might and main, while I go to Ilius and tell the old men of
our council and our wives to pray to the gods and vow hecatombs in their
honour.”



With this he went his way, and the black rim of hide that went round his
shield beat against his neck and his ancles.



Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus went into the open
space between the hosts to fight in single combat. When they were close up
to one another Diomed of the loud war-cry was the first to speak. “Who, my
good sir,” said he, “who are you among men? I have never seen you in
battle until now, but you are daring beyond all others if you abide my
onset. Woe to those fathers whose sons face my might. If, however, you are
one of the immortals and have come down from heaven, I will not fight you;
for even valiant Lycurgus, son of Dryas, did not live long when he took to
fighting with the gods. He it was that drove the nursing women who were in
charge of frenzied Bacchus through the land of Nysa, and they flung their
thyrsi on the ground as murderous Lycurgus beat them with his oxgoad.
Bacchus himself plunged terror-stricken into the sea, and Thetis took him
to her bosom to comfort him, for he was scared by the fury with which the
man reviled him. Thereon the gods who live at ease were angry with
Lycurgus and the son of Saturn struck him blind, nor did he live much
longer after he had become hateful to the immortals. Therefore I will not
fight with the blessed gods; but if you are of them that eat the fruit of
the ground, draw near and meet your doom.”



And the son of Hippolochus answered, “Son of Tydeus, why ask me of my
lineage? Men come and go as leaves year by year upon the trees. Those of
autumn the wind sheds upon the ground, but when spring returns the forest
buds forth with fresh vines. Even so is it with the generations of
mankind, the new spring up as the old are passing away. If, then, you
would learn my descent, it is one that is well known to many. There is a
city in the heart of Argos, pasture land of horses, called Ephyra, where
Sisyphus lived, who was the craftiest of all mankind. He was the son of
Aeolus, and had a son named Glaucus, who was father to Bellerophon, whom
heaven endowed with the most surpassing comeliness and beauty. But Proetus
devised his ruin, and being stronger than he, drove him from the land of
the Argives, over which Jove had made him ruler. For Antea, wife of
Proetus, lusted after him, and would have had him lie with her in secret;
but Bellerophon was an honourable man and would not, so she told lies
about him to Proetus. ‘Proetus,’ said she, ‘kill Bellerophon or die, for
he would have had converse with me against my will.’ The king was angered,
but shrank from killing Bellerophon, so he sent him to Lycia with lying
letters of introduction, written on a folded tablet, and containing much
ill against the bearer. He bade Bellerophon show these letters to his
father-in-law, to the end that he might thus perish; Bellerophon therefore
went to Lycia, and the gods convoyed him safely.



“When he reached the river Xanthus, which is in Lycia, the king received
him with all goodwill, feasted him nine days, and killed nine heifers in
his honour, but when rosy-fingered morning appeared upon the tenth day, he
questioned him and desired to see the letter from his son-in-law Proetus.
When he had received the wicked letter he first commanded Bellerophon to
kill that savage monster, the Chimaera, who was not a human being, but a
goddess, for she had the head of a lion and the tail of a serpent, while
her body was that of a goat, and she breathed forth flames of fire; but
Bellerophon slew her, for he was guided by signs from heaven. He next
fought the far-famed Solymi, and this, he said, was the hardest of all his
battles. Thirdly, he killed the Amazons, women who were the peers of men,
and as he was returning thence the king devised yet another plan for his
destruction; he picked the bravest warriors in all Lycia, and placed them
in ambuscade, but not a man ever came back, for Bellerophon killed every
one of them. Then the king knew that he must be the valiant offspring of a
god, so he kept him in Lycia, gave him his daughter in marriage, and made
him of equal honour in the kingdom with himself; and the Lycians gave him
a piece of land, the best in all the country, fair with vineyards and
tilled fields, to have and to hold.



“The king’s daughter bore Bellerophon three children, Isander,
Hippolochus, and Laodameia. Jove, the lord of counsel, lay with Laodameia,
and she bore him noble Sarpedon; but when Bellerophon came to be hated by
all the gods, he wandered all desolate and dismayed upon the Alean plain,
gnawing at his own heart, and shunning the path of man. Mars, insatiate of
battle, killed his son Isander while he was fighting the Solymi; his
daughter was killed by Diana of the golden reins, for she was angered with
her; but Hippolochus was father to myself, and when he sent me to Troy he
urged me again and again to fight ever among the foremost and outvie my
peers, so as not to shame the blood of my fathers who were the noblest in
Ephyra and in all Lycia. This, then, is the descent I claim.”



Thus did he speak, and the heart of Diomed was glad. He planted his spear
in the ground, and spoke to him with friendly words. “Then,” he said, “you
are an old friend of my father’s house. Great Oeneus once entertained
Bellerophon for twenty days, and the two exchanged presents. Oeneus gave a
belt rich with purple, and Bellerophon a double cup, which I left at home
when I set out for Troy. I do not remember Tydeus, for he was taken from
us while I was yet a child, when the army of the Achaeans was cut to
pieces before Thebes. Henceforth, however, I must be your host in middle
Argos, and you mine in Lycia, if I should ever go there; let us avoid one
another’s spears even during a general engagement; there are many noble
Trojans and allies whom I can kill, if I overtake them and heaven delivers
them into my hand; so again with yourself, there are many Achaeans whose
lives you may take if you can; we two, then, will exchange armour, that
all present may know of the old ties that subsist between us.”



With these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one another’s
hands, and plighted friendship. But the son of Saturn made Glaucus take
leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze, the worth of
a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine.



Now when Hector reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives and
daughters of the Trojans came running towards him to ask after their sons,
brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about praying to the
gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him.



Presently he reached the splendid palace of King Priam, adorned with
colonnades of hewn stone. In it there were fifty bedchambers—all of
hewn stone—built near one another, where the sons of Priam slept,
each with his wedded wife. Opposite these, on the other side the
courtyard, there were twelve upper rooms also of hewn stone for Priam’s
daughters, built near one another, where his sons-in-law slept with their
wives. When Hector got there, his fond mother came up to him with Laodice
the fairest of her daughters. She took his hand within her own and said,
“My son, why have you left the battle to come hither? Are the Achaeans,
woe betide them, pressing you hard about the city that you have thought
fit to come and uplift your hands to Jove from the citadel? Wait till I
can bring you wine that you may make offering to Jove and to the other
immortals, and may then drink and be refreshed. Wine gives a man fresh
strength when he is wearied, as you now are with fighting on behalf of
your kinsmen.”



And Hector answered, “Honoured mother, bring no wine, lest you unman me
and I forget my strength. I dare not make a drink-offering to Jove with
unwashed hands; one who is bespattered with blood and filth may not pray
to the son of Saturn. Get the matrons together, and go with offerings to
the temple of Minerva driver of the spoil; there, upon the knees of
Minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in your house—the
one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to sacrifice twelve yearling
heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the goddess if
she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little ones of the
Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from off the goodly city of Ilius, for
he fights with fury, and fills men’s souls with panic. Go, then, to the
temple of Minerva, while I seek Paris and exhort him, if he will hear my
words. Would that the earth might open her jaws and swallow him, for Jove
bred him to be the bane of the Trojans, and of Priam and Priam’s sons.
Could I but see him go down into the house of Hades, my heart would forget
its heaviness.”



His mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who gathered
the matrons throughout the city. She then went down into her fragrant
store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of Sidonian
women, whom Alexandrus had brought over from Sidon when he sailed the seas
upon that voyage during which he carried off Helen. Hecuba took out the
largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully enriched with
embroidery, as an offering to Minerva: it glittered like a star, and lay
at the very bottom of the chest. With this she went on her way and many
matrons with her.



When they reached the temple of Minerva, lovely Theano, daughter of
Cisseus and wife of Antenor, opened the doors, for the Trojans had made
her priestess of Minerva. The women lifted up their hands to the goddess
with a loud cry, and Theano took the robe to lay it upon the knees of
Minerva, praying the while to the daughter of great Jove. “Holy Minerva,”
she cried, “protectress of our city, mighty goddess, break the spear of
Diomed and lay him low before the Scaean gates. Do this, and we will
sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet known the goad, in your
temple, if you will have pity upon the town, with the wives and little
ones of the Trojans.” Thus she prayed, but Pallas Minerva granted not her
prayer.



While they were thus praying to the daughter of great Jove, Hector went to
the fair house of Alexandrus, which he had built for him by the foremost
builders in the land. They had built him his house, storehouse, and
courtyard near those of Priam and Hector on the acropolis. Here Hector
entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his hand; the bronze point
gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the shaft of the spear by a
ring of gold. He found Alexandrus within the house, busied about his
armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling his curved bow; there, too,
sat Argive Helen with her women, setting them their several tasks; and as
Hector saw him he rebuked him with words of scorn. “Sir,” said he, “you do
ill to nurse this rancour; the people perish fighting round this our town;
you would yourself chide one whom you saw shirking his part in the combat.
Up then, or ere long the city will be in a blaze.”



And Alexandrus answered, “Hector, your rebuke is just; listen therefore,
and believe me when I tell you that I am not here so much through rancour
or ill-will towards the Trojans, as from a desire to indulge my grief. My
wife was even now gently urging me to battle, and I hold it better that I
should go, for victory is ever fickle. Wait, then, while I put on my
armour, or go first and I will follow. I shall be sure to overtake you.”



Hector made no answer, but Helen tried to soothe him. “Brother,” said she,
“to my abhorred and sinful self, would that a whirlwind had caught me up
on the day my mother brought me forth, and had borne me to some mountain
or to the waves of the roaring sea that should have swept me away ere this
mischief had come about. But, since the gods have devised these evils,
would, at any rate, that I had been wife to a better man—to one who
could smart under dishonour and men’s evil speeches. This fellow was never
yet to be depended upon, nor never will be, and he will surely reap what
he has sown. Still, brother, come in and rest upon this seat, for it is
you who bear the brunt of that toil that has been caused by my hateful
self and by the sin of Alexandrus—both of whom Jove has doomed to be
a theme of song among those that shall be born hereafter.”



And Hector answered, “Bid me not be seated, Helen, for all the goodwill
you bear me. I cannot stay. I am in haste to help the Trojans, who miss me
greatly when I am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his own
self also let him make haste to overtake me before I am out of the city. I
must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son, for I know
not whether I shall ever again return to them, or whether the gods will
cause me to fall by the hands of the Achaeans.”



Then Hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. He did not find
Andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of her maids,
weeping bitterly. Seeing, then, that she was not within, he stood on the
threshold of the women’s rooms and said, “Women, tell me, and tell me
true, where did Andromache go when she left the house? Was it to my
sisters, or to my brothers’ wives? or is she at the temple of Minerva
where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?”



His good housekeeper answered, “Hector, since you bid me tell you truly,
she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers’ wives, nor yet to the
temple of Minerva, where the other women are propitiating the awful
goddess, but she is on the high wall of Ilius, for she had heard the
Trojans were being hard pressed, and that the Achaeans were in great
force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse went with her
carrying the child.”



Hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went down
the streets by the same way that he had come. When he had gone through the
city and had reached the Scaean gates through which he would go out on to
the plain, his wife came running towards him, Andromache, daughter of
great Eetion who ruled in Thebe under the wooded slopes of Mt. Placus, and
was king of the Cilicians. His daughter had married Hector, and now came
to meet him with a nurse who carried his little child in her bosom—a
mere babe. Hector’s darling son, and lovely as a star. Hector had named
him Scamandrius, but the people called him Astyanax, for his father stood
alone as chief guardian of Ilius. Hector smiled as he looked upon the boy,
but he did not speak, and Andromache stood by him weeping and taking his
hand in her own. “Dear husband,” said she, “your valour will bring you to
destruction; think on your infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long
shall be your widow—for the Achaeans will set upon you in a body and
kill you. It would be better for me, should I lose you, to lie dead and
buried, for I shall have nothing left to comfort me when you are gone,
save only sorrow. I have neither father nor mother now. Achilles slew my
father when he sacked Thebe the goodly city of the Cilicians. He slew him,
but did not for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him in his
wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the mountain
nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, planted a grove of elms about his
tomb. I had seven brothers in my father’s house, but on the same day they
all went within the house of Hades. Achilles killed them as they were with
their sheep and cattle. My mother—her who had been queen of all the
land under Mt. Placus—he brought hither with the spoil, and freed
her for a great sum, but the archer-queen Diana took her in the house of
your father. Nay—Hector—you who to me are father, mother,
brother, and dear husband—have mercy upon me; stay here upon this
wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as for the
host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be best scaled, and
the wall is weakest. Thrice have the bravest of them come thither and
assailed it, under the two Ajaxes, Idomeneus, the sons of Atreus, and the
brave son of Tydeus, either of their own bidding, or because some
soothsayer had told them.”



And Hector answered, “Wife, I too have thought upon all this, but with
what face should I look upon the Trojans, men or women, if I shirked
battle like a coward? I cannot do so: I know nothing save to fight bravely
in the forefront of the Trojan host and win renown alike for my father and
myself. Well do I know that the day will surely come when mighty Ilius
shall be destroyed with Priam and Priam’s people, but I grieve for none of
these—not even for Hecuba, nor King Priam, nor for my brothers many
and brave who may fall in the dust before their foes—for none of
these do I grieve as for yourself when the day shall come on which some
one of the Achaeans shall rob you for ever of your freedom, and bear you
weeping away. It may be that you will have to ply the loom in Argos at the
bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from the springs Messeis or
Hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel task-master; then will one say
who sees you weeping, ‘She was wife to Hector, the bravest warrior among
the Trojans during the war before Ilius.’ On this your tears will break
forth anew for him who would have put away the day of captivity from you.
May I lie dead under the barrow that is heaped over my body ere I hear
your cry as they carry you into bondage.”



He stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and nestled in
his nurse’s bosom, scared at the sight of his father’s armour, and at the
horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his helmet. His father and
mother laughed to see him, but Hector took the helmet from his head and
laid it all gleaming upon the ground. Then he took his darling child,
kissed him, and dandled him in his arms, praying over him the while to
Jove and to all the gods. “Jove,” he cried, “grant that this my child may
be even as myself, chief among the Trojans; let him be not less excellent
in strength, and let him rule Ilius with his might. Then may one say of
him as he comes from battle, ‘The son is far better than the father.’ May
he bring back the blood-stained spoils of him whom he has laid low, and
let his mother’s heart be glad.”



With this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who took him to
her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. As her husband watched her
his heart yearned towards her and he caressed her fondly, saying, “My own
wife, do not take these things too bitterly to heart. No one can hurry me
down to Hades before my time, but if a man’s hour is come, be he brave or
be he coward, there is no escape for him when he has once been born. Go,
then, within the house, and busy yourself with your daily duties, your
loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for war is man’s
matter, and mine above all others of them that have been born in Ilius.”



He took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back again to
her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards him. When she
reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade them all join in
her lament; so they mourned Hector in his own house though he was yet
alive, for they deemed that they should never see him return safe from
battle, and from the furious hands of the Achaeans.



Paris did not remain long in his house. He donned his goodly armour
overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet
could take him. As a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops
gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the
fair-flowing river—he holds his head high, and his mane streams upon
his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to the
haunts and feeding ground of the mares—even so went forth Paris from
high Pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he laughed aloud
as he sped swiftly on his way. Forthwith he came upon his brother Hector,
who was then turning away from the place where he had held converse with
his wife, and he was himself the first to speak. “Sir,” said he, “I fear
that I have kept you waiting when you are in haste, and have not come as
quickly as you bade me.”



“My good brother,” answered Hector, “you fight bravely, and no man with
any justice can make light of your doings in battle. But you are careless
and wilfully remiss. It grieves me to the heart to hear the ill that the
Trojans speak about you, for they have suffered much on your account. Let
us be going, and we will make things right hereafter, should Jove
vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before ever-living gods of
heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the Achaeans from Troy.”

=== ILIAD BOOK 7 ===

Hector and Ajax fight—Hector is getting worsted when night comes on
and parts them—They exchange presents—The burial of the dead,
and the building of a wall round their ships by the Achaeans—The
Achaeans buy their wine of Agamemnon and Menelaus.



With these words Hector passed through the gates, and his brother
Alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. As when heaven sends a
breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have laboured
at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome was the sight
of these two heroes to the Trojans.



Thereon Alexandrus killed Menesthius the son of Areithous; he lived in
Arne, and was son of Areithous the Mace-man, and of Phylomedusa. Hector
threw a spear at Eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck
under the bronze rim of his helmet. Glaucus, moreover, son of Hippolochus,
captain of the Lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote Iphinous son of
Dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his chariot behind his
fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and there was no life left
in him.



When, therefore, Minerva saw these men making havoc of the Argives, she
darted down to Ilius from the summits of Olympus, and Apollo, who was
looking on from Pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the Trojans
to be victorious. The pair met by the oak tree, and King Apollo son of
Jove was first to speak. “What would you have,” said he, “daughter of
great Jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither from Olympus? Have
you no pity upon the Trojans, and would you incline the scales of victory
in favour of the Danaans? Let me persuade you—for it will be better
thus—stay the combat for to-day, but let them renew the fight
hereafter till they compass the doom of Ilius, since you goddesses have
made up your minds to destroy the city.”



And Minerva answered, “So be it, Far-Darter; it was in this mind that I
came down from Olympus to the Trojans and Achaeans. Tell me, then, how do
you propose to end this present fighting?”



Apollo, son of Jove, replied, “Let us incite great Hector to challenge
some one of the Danaans in single combat; on this the Achaeans will be
shamed into finding a man who will fight him.”



Minerva assented, and Helenus son of Priam divined the counsel of the
gods; he therefore went up to Hector and said, “Hector son of Priam, peer
of gods in counsel, I am your brother, let me then persuade you. Bid the
other Trojans and Achaeans all of them take their seats, and challenge the
best man among the Achaeans to meet you in single combat. I have heard the
voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your doom is not yet come.”



Hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the Trojans,
grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they all sat down.
Agamemnon also bade the Achaeans be seated. But Minerva and Apollo, in the
likeness of vultures, perched on father Jove’s high oak tree, proud of
their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together, bristling with shield
and helmet and spear. As when the rising west wind furs the face of the
sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so sat the companies of Trojans
and Achaeans upon the plain. And Hector spoke thus:—



“Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, that I may speak even as I am minded; Jove
on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing, and
foreshadows ill for both of us, till you either take the towers of Troy,
or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. The princes of the Achaeans
are here present in the midst of you; let him, then, that will fight me
stand forward as your champion against Hector. Thus I say, and may Jove be
witness between us. If your champion slay me, let him strip me of my
armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body home that the
Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when I am dead. In
like manner, if Apollo vouchsafe me glory and I slay your champion, I will
strip him of his armour and take it to the city of Ilius, where I will
hang it in the temple of Apollo, but I will give up his body, that the
Achaeans may bury him at their ships,and then build him a mound by the
wide waters of the Hellespont. Then will one say hereafter as he sails his
ship over the sea, ‘This is the monument of one who died long since a
champion who was slain by mighty Hector.’ Thus will one say, and my fame
shall not be lost.”



Thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline the
challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last Menelaus rose and
rebuked them, for he was angry. “Alas,” he cried, “vain braggarts, women
forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon us if no man
of the Danaans will now face Hector. May you be turned every man of you
into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in your places.
I will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of the fight will be
from on high in the hands of the immortal gods.”



With these words he put on his armour; and then, O Menelaus, your life
would have come to an end at the hands of hands of Hector, for he was far
better the man, had not the princes of the Achaeans sprung upon you and
checked you. King Agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said,
“Menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. Be patient in spite of
passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself as
Hector son of Priam, who is feared by many another as well as you. Even
Achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from meeting him in
battle. Sit down your own people, and the Achaeans will send some other
champion to fight Hector; fearless and fond of battle though he be, I ween
his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes out alive from the
hurly-burly of this fight.”



With these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother, whereon
his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders. Then Nestor
rose and spoke, “Of a truth,” said he, “the Achaean land is fallen upon
evil times. The old knight Peleus, counsellor and orator among the
Myrmidons, loved when I was in his house to question me concerning the
race and lineage of all the Argives. How would it not grieve him could he
hear of them as now quailing before Hector? Many a time would he lift his
hands in prayer that his soul might leave his body and go down within the
house of Hades. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were
still young and strong as when the Pylians and Arcadians were gathered in
fight by the rapid river Celadon under the walls of Pheia, and round about
the waters of the river Iardanus. The godlike hero Ereuthalion stood
forward as their champion, with the armour of King Areithous upon his
shoulders—Areithous whom men and women had surnamed ‘the Mace-man,’
because he fought neither with bow nor spear, but broke the battalions of
the foe with his iron mace. Lycurgus killed him, not in fair fight, but by
entrapping him in a narrow way where his mace served him in no stead; for
Lycurgus was too quick for him and speared him through the middle, so he
fell to earth on his back. Lycurgus then spoiled him of the armour which
Mars had given him, and bore it in battle thenceforward; but when he grew
old and stayed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire Ereuthalion, who
in this same armour challenged the foremost men among us. The others
quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade me fight him though none other
would venture; I was the youngest man of them all; but when I fought him
Minerva vouchsafed me victory. He was the biggest and strongest man that
ever I killed, and covered much ground as he lay sprawling upon the earth.
Would that I were still young and strong as I then was, for the son of
Priam would then soon find one who would face him. But you, foremost among
the whole host though you be, have none of you any stomach for fighting
Hector.”



Thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to their
feet. Foremost of all uprose King Agamemnon, and after him brave Diomed
the son of Tydeus. Next were the two Ajaxes, men clothed in valour as with
a garment, and then Idomeneus, and Meriones his brother in arms. After
these Eurypylus son of Euaemon, Thoas the son of Andraemon, and Ulysses
also rose. Then Nestor knight of Gerene again spoke, saying: “Cast lots
among you to see who shall be chosen. If he come alive out of this fight
he will have done good service alike to his own soul and to the Achaeans.”



Thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown it
into the helmet of Agamemnon son of Atreus, the people lifted their hands
in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the vault of
heaven, “Father Jove, grant that the lot fall on Ajax, or on the son of
Tydeus, or upon the king of rich Mycene himself.”



As they were speaking, Nestor knight of Gerene shook the helmet, and from
it there fell the very lot which they wanted—the lot of Ajax. The
herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the Achaeans,
going from left to right; but they none of them owned it. When, however,
in due course he reached the man who had written upon it and had put it
into the helmet, brave Ajax held out his hand, and the herald gave him the
lot. When Ajax saw his mark he knew it and was glad; he threw it to the
ground and said, “My friends, the lot is mine, and I rejoice, for I shall
vanquish Hector. I will put on my armour; meanwhile, pray to King Jove in
silence among yourselves that the Trojans may not hear you—or aloud
if you will, for we fear no man. None shall overcome me, neither by force
nor cunning, for I was born and bred in Salamis, and can hold my own in
all things.”



With this they fell praying to King Jove the son of Saturn, and thus would
one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, “Father Jove that
rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, vouchsafe victory to Ajax, and
let him win great glory: but if you wish well to Hector also and would
protect him, grant to each of them equal fame and prowess.”



Thus they prayed, and Ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming bronze.
When he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous Mars when he
takes part among men whom Jove has set fighting with one another—even
so did huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, spring forward with a grim
smile on his face as he brandished his long spear and strode onward. The
Argives were elated as they beheld him, but the Trojans trembled in every
limb, and the heart even of Hector beat quickly, but he could not now
retreat and withdraw into the ranks behind him, for he had been the
challenger. Ajax came up bearing his shield in front of him like a wall—a
shield of bronze with seven folds of ox-hide—the work of Tychius, who
lived in Hyle and was by far the best worker in leather. He had made it
with the hides of seven full-fed bulls, and over these he had set an
eighth layer of bronze. Holding this shield before him, Ajax son of
Telamon came close up to Hector, and menaced him saying, “Hector, you
shall now learn, man to man, what kind of champions the Danaans have among
them even besides lion-hearted Achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. He
now abides at the ships in anger with Agamemnon shepherd of his people,
but there are many of us who are well able to face you; therefore begin
the fight.”



And Hector answered, “Noble Ajax, son of Telamon, captain of the host,
treat me not as though I were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight. I
have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. I am quick to
turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this I deem the main
thing in battle. I can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and in hand
to hand fighting can delight the heart of Mars; howbeit I would not take
such a man as you are off his guard—but I will smite you openly if I
can.”



He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. It struck the
sevenfold shield in its outermost layer—the eighth, which was of
bronze—and went through six of the layers but in the seventh hide it
stayed. Then Ajax threw in his turn, and struck the round shield of the
son of Priam. The terrible spear went through his gleaming shield, and
pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced the
shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved his life. They then
each of them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on one another
like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance: the son
of Priam struck the middle of Ajax’s shield, but the bronze did not break,
and the point of his dart was turned. Ajax then sprang forward and pierced
the shield of Hector; the spear went through it and staggered him as he
was springing forward to attack; it gashed his neck and the blood came
pouring from the wound, but even so Hector did not cease fighting; he gave
ground, and with his brawny hand seized a stone, rugged and huge, that was
lying upon the plain; with this he struck the shield of Ajax on the boss
that was in its middle, so that the bronze rang again. But Ajax in turn
caught up a far larger stone, swung it aloft, and hurled it with
prodigious force. This millstone of a rock broke Hector’s shield inwards
and threw him down on his back with the shield crushing him under it, but
Apollo raised him at once. Thereon they would have hacked at one another
in close combat with their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and
men, come forward, one from the Trojans and the other from the Achaeans—Talthybius
and Idaeus both of them honourable men; these parted them with their
staves, and the good herald Idaeus said, “My sons, fight no longer, you
are both of you valiant, and both are dear to Jove; we know this; but
night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be well gainsaid.”



Ajax son of Telamon answered, “Idaeus, bid Hector say so, for it was he
that challenged our princes. Let him speak first and I will accept his
saying.”



Then Hector said, “Ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and strength,
and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others of the
Achaeans. Let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will fight anew
till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to the other;
night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be well gainsaid.
Gladden, then, the hearts of the Achaeans at your ships, and more
especially those of your own followers and clansmen, while I, in the great
city of King Priam, bring comfort to the Trojans and their women, who vie
with one another in their prayers on my behalf. Let us, moreover, exchange
presents that it may be said among the Achaeans and Trojans, ‘They fought
with might and main, but were reconciled and parted in friendship.’”



On this he gave Ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and leathern
baldric, and in return Ajax gave him a girdle dyed with purple. Thus they
parted, the one going to the host of the Achaeans, and the other to that
of the Trojans, who rejoiced when they saw their hero come to them safe
and unharmed from the strong hands of mighty Ajax. They led him,
therefore, to the city as one that had been saved beyond their hopes. On
the other side the Achaeans brought Ajax elated with victory to Agamemnon.



When they reached the quarters of the son of Atreus, Agamemnon sacrificed
for them a five-year-old bull in honour of Jove the son of Saturn. They
flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into joints; these they
cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them on the spits, roasting
them sufficiently, and then drawing them off. When they had done all this
and had prepared the feast, they ate it, and every man had his full and
equal share, so that all were satisfied, and King Agamemnon gave Ajax some
slices cut lengthways down the loin, as a mark of special honour. As soon
as they had had enough to eat and drink, old Nestor whose counsel was ever
truest began to speak; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he
addressed them thus:—



“Son of Atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the Achaeans are
now dead, whose blood Mars has shed by the banks of the Scamander, and
their souls have gone down to the house of Hades, it will be well when
morning comes that we should cease fighting; we will then wheel our dead
together with oxen and mules and burn them not far from the ships, that
when we sail hence we may take the bones of our comrades home to their
children. Hard by the funeral pyre we will build a barrow that shall be
raised from the plain for all in common; near this let us set about
building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships, and let it have
well-made gates that there may be a way through them for our chariots.
Close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to keep off both
horse and foot, that the Trojan chieftains may not bear hard upon us.”



Thus he spoke, and the princes shouted in applause. Meanwhile the Trojans
held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by the gates
of King Priam’s palace; and wise Antenor spoke. “Hear me,” he said,
“Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even as I am minded.
Let us give up Argive Helen and her wealth to the sons of Atreus, for we
are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants, and shall not
prosper till we have done as I say.”



He then sat down and Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen rose to speak.
“Antenor,” said he, “your words are not to my liking; you can find a
better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in good
earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. I will speak
plainly, and hereby notify to the Trojans that I will not give up the
woman; but the wealth that I brought home with her from Argos I will
restore, and will add yet further of my own.”



On this, when Paris had spoken and taken his seat, Priam of the race of
Dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus: “Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and allies,
that I may speak even as I am minded. Get your suppers now as hitherto
throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. At daybreak let
Idaeus go to the ships, and tell Agamemnon and Menelaus sons of Atreus the
saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has come about; and let him
also be instant with them that they now cease fighting till we burn our
dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other.”



Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They took supper in
their companies and at daybreak Idaeus went his way to the ships. He found
the Danaans, servants of Mars, in council at the stern of Agamemnon’s
ship, and took his place in the midst of them. “Son of Atreus,” he said,
“and princes of the Achaean host, Priam and the other noble Trojans have
sent me to tell you the saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has
come about, if so be that you may find it acceptable. All the treasure he
took with him in his ships to Troy—would that he had sooner perished—he
will restore, and will add yet further of his own, but he will not give up
the wedded wife of Menelaus, though the Trojans would have him do so.
Priam bade me inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our
dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give
victory to one or to the other.”



They all held their peace, but presently Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke,
saying, “Let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet Helen, for even
a child may see that the doom of the Trojans is at hand.”



The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words that Diomed had
spoken, and thereon King Agamemnon said to Idaeus, “Idaeus, you have heard
the answer the Achaeans make you and I with them. But as concerning the
dead, I give you leave to burn them, for when men are once dead there
should be no grudging them the rites of fire. Let Jove the mighty husband
of Juno be witness to this covenant.”



As he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and Idaeus
went back to the strong city of Ilius. The Trojans and Dardanians were
gathered in council waiting his return; when he came, he stood in their
midst and delivered his message. As soon as they heard it they set about
their twofold labour, some to gather the corpses, and others to bring in
wood. The Argives on their part also hastened from their ships, some to
gather the corpses, and others to bring in wood.



The sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into the vault
of heaven from the slow still currents of deep Oceanus, when the two
armies met. They could hardly recognise their dead, but they washed the
clotted gore from off them, shed tears over them, and lifted them upon
their waggons. Priam had forbidden the Trojans to wail aloud, so they
heaped their dead sadly and silently upon the pyre, and having burned them
went back to the city of Ilius. The Achaeans in like manner heaped their
dead sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned them went back to
their ships.



Now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the Achaeans
were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that was raised in
common for all, and hard by this they built a high wall to shelter
themselves and their ships; they gave it strong gates that there might be
a way through them for their chariots, and close outside it they dug a
trench deep and wide, and they planted it within with stakes.



Thus did the Achaeans toil, and the gods, seated by the side of Jove the
lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but Neptune, lord of the
earthquake, spoke, saying, “Father Jove, what mortal in the whole world
will again take the gods into his counsel? See you not how the Achaeans
have built a wall about their ships and driven a trench all round it,
without offering hecatombs to the gods? The fame of this wall will reach
as far as dawn itself, and men will no longer think anything of the one
which Phoebus Apollo and myself built with so much labour for Laomedon.”



Jove was displeased and answered, “What, O shaker of the earth, are you
talking about? A god less powerful than yourself might be alarmed at what
they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as dawn itself. Surely when
the Achaeans have gone home with their ships, you can shatter their wall
and fling it into the sea; you can cover the beach with sand again, and
the great wall of the Achaeans will then be utterly effaced.”



Thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the Achaeans was
completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their supper.
Many ships had come with wine from Lemnos, sent by Eueneus the son of
Jason, born to him by Hypsipyle. The son of Jason freighted them with ten
thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to the sons of Atreus,
Agamemnon and Menelaus. From this supply the Achaeans bought their wine,
some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some with whole
heifers, and some again with captives. They spread a goodly banquet and
feasted the whole night through, as also did the Trojans and their allies
in the city. But all the time Jove boded them ill and roared with his
portentous thunder. Pale fear got hold upon them, and they spilled the
wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any dare drink till he had
made offerings to the most mighty son of Saturn. Then they laid themselves
down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.

=== ILIAD BOOK 8 ===

Jove forbids the gods to interfere further—There is an even fight
till midday, but then Jove inclines the scales of victory in favour of the
Trojans, who eventually chase the Achaeans within their wall—Juno
and Minerva set out to help the Trojans: Jove sends Iris to turn them
back, but later on he promises Juno that she shall have her way in the end—Hector’s
triumph is stayed by nightfall—The Trojans bivouac on the plain.



Now when Morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse light
over the earth, Jove called the gods in council on the topmost crest of
serrated Olympus. Then he spoke and all the other gods gave ear. “Hear
me,” said he, “gods and goddesses, that I may speak even as I am minded.
Let none of you neither goddess nor god try to cross me, but obey me every
one of you that I may bring this matter to an end. If I see anyone acting
apart and helping either Trojans or Danaans, he shall be beaten
inordinately ere he come back again to Olympus; or I will hurl him down
into dark Tartarus far into the deepest pit under the earth, where the
gates are iron and the floor bronze, as far beneath Hades as heaven is
high above the earth, that you may learn how much the mightiest I am among
you. Try me and find out for yourselves. Hangs me a golden chain from
heaven, and lay hold of it all of you, gods and goddesses together—tug
as you will, you will not drag Jove the supreme counsellor from heaven to
earth; but were I to pull at it myself I should draw you up with earth and
sea into the bargain, then would I bind the chain about some pinnacle of
Olympus and leave you all dangling in the mid firmament. So far am I above
all others either of gods or men.”



They were frightened and all of them of held their peace, for he had
spoken masterfully; but at last Minerva answered, “Father, son of Saturn,
king of kings, we all know that your might is not to be gainsaid, but we
are also sorry for the Danaan warriors, who are perishing and coming to a
bad end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from actual
fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the Argives that
they may not all of them perish in your displeasure.”



Jove smiled at her and answered, “Take heart, my child, Trito-born; I am
not really in earnest, and I wish to be kind to you.”



With this he yoked his fleet horses, with hoofs of bronze and manes of
glittering gold. He girded himself also with gold about the body, seized
his gold whip and took his seat in his chariot. Thereon he lashed his
horses and they flew forward nothing loth midway twixt earth and starry
heaven. After a while he reached many-fountained Ida, mother of wild
beasts, and Gargarus, where are his grove and fragrant altar. There the
father of gods and men stayed his horses, took them from the chariot, and
hid them in a thick cloud; then he took his seat all glorious upon the
topmost crests, looking down upon the city of Troy and the ships of the
Achaeans.



The Achaeans took their morning meal hastily at the ships, and afterwards
put on their armour. The Trojans on the other hand likewise armed
themselves throughout the city, fewer in numbers but nevertheless eager
perforce to do battle for their wives and children. All the gates were
flung wide open, and horse and foot sallied forth with the tramp as of a
great multitude.



When they were got together in one place, shield clashed with shield, and
spear with spear, in the conflict of mail-clad men. Mighty was the din as
the bossed shields pressed hard on one another—death—cry and
shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with blood.



Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning their weapons beat
against one another, and the people fell, but when the sun had reached
mid-heaven, the sire of all balanced his golden scales, and put two fates
of death within them, one for the Trojans and the other for the Achaeans.
He took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted it up the day of the
Achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the Achaeans settled down upon
the ground, while that of the Trojans rose heavenwards. Then he thundered
aloud from Ida, and sent the glare of his lightning upon the Achaeans;
when they saw this, pale fear fell upon them and they were sore afraid.



Idomeneus dared not stay nor yet Agamemnon, nor did the two Ajaxes,
servants of Mars, hold their ground. Nestor knight of Gerene alone stood
firm, bulwark of the Achaeans, not of his own will, but one of his horses
was disabled. Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen had hit it with an arrow
just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow away from the
skull, a very deadly place. The horse bounded in his anguish as the arrow
pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others into confusion. The old
man instantly began cutting the traces with his sword, but Hector’s fleet
horses bore down upon him through the rout with their bold charioteer,
even Hector himself, and the old man would have perished there and then
had not Diomed been quick to mark, and with a loud cry called Ulysses to
help him.



“Ulysses,” he cried, “noble son of Laertes where are you flying to, with
your back turned like a coward? See that you are not struck with a spear
between the shoulders. Stay here and help me to defend Nestor from this
man’s furious onset.”



Ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the Achaeans,
and the son of Tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick of the fight
took his stand before the horses of the son of Neleus. “Sir,” said he,
“these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force is spent, and age
is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your horses are slow to
move. Mount my chariot and see what the horses of Tros can do—how
cleverly they can scud hither and thither over the plain either in flight
or in pursuit. I took them from the hero Aeneas. Let our squires attend to
your own steeds, but let us drive mine straight at the Trojans, that
Hector may learn how furiously I too can wield my spear.”



Nestor knight of Gerene hearkened to his words. Thereon the doughty
squires, Sthenelus and kind-hearted Eurymedon, saw to Nestor’s horses,
while the two both mounted Diomed’s chariot. Nestor took the reins in his
hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with Hector, and
the son of Tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging full speed
towards them. He missed him, but struck his charioteer and squire Eniopeus
son of noble Thebaeus in the breast by the nipple while the reins were in
his hands, so that he died there and then, and the horses swerved as he
fell headlong from the chariot. Hector was greatly grieved at the loss of
his charioteer, but let him lie for all his sorrow, while he went in quest
of another driver; nor did his steeds have to go long without one, for he
presently found brave Archeptolemus the son of Iphitus, and made him get
up behind the horses, giving the reins into his hand.



All had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been penned
up in Ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been quick to
mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt which fell just in front of
Diomed’s horses with a flare of burning brimstone. The horses were
frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the reins dropped from
Nestor’s hands. Then he was afraid and said to Diomed, “Son of Tydeus,
turn your horses in flight; see you not that the hand of Jove is against
you? To-day he vouchsafes victory to Hector; to-morrow, if it so please
him, he will again grant it to ourselves; no man, however brave, may
thwart the purpose of Jove, for he is far stronger than any.”



Diomed answered, “All that you have said is true; there is a grief however
which pierces me to the very heart, for Hector will talk among the Trojans
and say, ‘The son of Tydeus fled before me to the ships.’ This is the
vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me.”



“Son of Tydeus,” replied Nestor, “what mean you? Though Hector say that
you are a coward the Trojans and Dardanians will not believe him, nor yet
the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low.”



So saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle, and
with a cry that rent the air the Trojans and Hector rained their darts
after them. Hector shouted to him and said, “Son of Tydeus, the Danaans
have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at table, the meals
they give you, and the filling of your cup with wine. Henceforth they will
despise you, for you are become no better than a woman. Be off, girl and
coward that you are, you shall not scale our walls through any flinching
upon my part; neither shall you carry off our wives in your ships, for I
shall kill you with my own hand.”



The son of Tydeus was in two minds whether or no to turn his horses round
again and fight him. Thrice did he doubt, and thrice did Jove thunder from
the heights of Ida in token to the Trojans that he would turn the battle
in their favour. Hector then shouted to them and said, “Trojans, Lycians,
and Dardanians, lovers of close fighting, be men, my friends, and fight
with might and with main; I see that Jove is minded to vouchsafe victory
and great glory to myself, while he will deal destruction upon the
Danaans. Fools, for having thought of building this weak and worthless
wall. It shall not stay my fury; my horses will spring lightly over their
trench, and when I am at their ships forget not to bring me fire that I
may burn them, while I slaughter the Argives who will be all dazed and
bewildered by the smoke.”



Then he cried to his horses, “Xanthus and Podargus, and you Aethon and
goodly Lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet corn
with which Andromache daughter of great Eetion has fed you, and for she
has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would, before doing
so even for me who am her own husband. Haste in pursuit, that we may take
the shield of Nestor, the fame of which ascends to heaven, for it is of
solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may strip from the shoulders of
Diomed the cuirass which Vulcan made him. Could we take these two things,
the Achaeans would set sail in their ships this self-same night.”



Thus did he vaunt, but Queen Juno made high Olympus quake as she shook
with rage upon her throne. Then said she to the mighty god of Neptune,
“What now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? Can you find no compassion
in your heart for the dying Danaans, who bring you many a welcome offering
to Helice and to Aegae? Wish them well then. If all of us who are with the
Danaans were to drive the Trojans back and keep Jove from helping them, he
would have to sit there sulking alone on Ida.”



King Neptune was greatly troubled and answered, “Juno, rash of tongue,
what are you talking about? We other gods must not set ourselves against
Jove, for he is far stronger than we are.”



Thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch, from
the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors, who were
pent up there by Hector son of Priam, now that the hand of Jove was with
him. He would even have set fire to the ships and burned them, had not
Queen Juno put it into the mind of Agamemnon, to bestir himself and to
encourage the Achaeans. To this end he went round the ships and tents
carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge black hull
of Ulysses’ ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from this place that
his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards the tents of Ajax
son of Telamon, and on the other towards those of Achilles—for these
two heroes, well assured of their own strength, had valorously drawn up
their ships at the two ends of the line. From this spot then, with a voice
that could be heard afar, he shouted to the Danaans, saying, “Argives,
shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in semblance only; where are now
our vaunts that we should prove victorious—the vaunts we made so
vaingloriously in Lemnos, when we ate the flesh of horned cattle and
filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? You vowed that you would each of you
stand against a hundred or two hundred men, and now you prove no match
even for one—for Hector, who will be ere long setting our ships in a
blaze. Father Jove, did you ever so ruin a great king and rob him so
utterly of his greatness? Yet, when to my sorrow I was coming hither, I
never let my ship pass your altars without offering the fat and
thigh-bones of heifers upon every one of them, so eager was I to sack the
city of Troy. Vouchsafe me then this prayer—suffer us to escape at
any rate with our lives, and let not the Achaeans be so utterly vanquished
by the Trojans.”



Thus did he pray, and father Jove pitying his tears vouchsafed him that
his people should live, not die; forthwith he sent them an eagle, most
unfailingly portentous of all birds, with a young fawn in its talons; the
eagle dropped the fawn by the altar on which the Achaeans sacrificed to
Jove the lord of omens; when, therefore, the people saw that the bird had
come from Jove, they sprang more fiercely upon the Trojans and fought more
boldly.



There was no man of all the many Danaans who could then boast that he had
driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner than the
son of Tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an armed
warrior of the Trojans, Agelaus the son of Phradmon. He had turned his
horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back midway between his
shoulders and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling
round him as he fell forward from his chariot.



After him came Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus, the two Ajaxes
clothed in valour as with a garment, Idomeneus and his companion in arms
Meriones, peer of murderous Mars, and Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon.
Ninth came Teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover of the
shield of Ajax son of Telamon. When Ajax lifted his shield Teucer would
peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the man would fall
dead; then Teucer would hie back to Ajax as a child to its mother, and
again duck down under his shield.



Which of the Trojans did brave Teucer first kill? Orsilochus, and then
Ormenus and Ophelestes, Daetor, Chromius, and godlike Lycophontes, Amopaon
son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus. All these in turn did he lay low upon
the earth, and King Agamemnon was glad when he saw him making havoc of the
Trojans with his mighty bow. He went up to him and said, “Teucer, man
after my own heart, son of Telamon, captain among the host, shoot on, and
be at once the saving of the Danaans and the glory of your father Telamon,
who brought you up and took care of you in his own house when you were a
child, bastard though you were. Cover him with glory though he is far off;
I will promise and I will assuredly perform; if aegis-bearing Jove and
Minerva grant me to sack the city of Ilius, you shall have the next best
meed of honour after my own—a tripod, or two horses with their
chariot, or a woman who shall go up into your bed.”



And Teucer answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, you need not urge me; from
the moment we began to drive them back to Ilius, I have never ceased so
far as in me lies to look out for men whom I can shoot and kill; I have
shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried in the flesh of
warlike youths, but this mad dog I cannot hit.”



As he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at Hector, for he was bent on
hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit Priam’s brave
son Gorgythion in the breast. His mother, fair Castianeira, lovely as a
goddess, had been married from Aesyme, and now he bowed his head as a
garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers in spring—even
thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his helmet.



Again he aimed at Hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his
arrow missed, for Apollo turned it aside; but he hit Hector’s brave
charioteer Archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was driving
furiously into the fight. The horses swerved aside as he fell headlong
from the chariot, and there was no life left in him. Hector was greatly
grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for all his sorrow he let him
lie where he fell, and bade his brother Cebriones, who was hard by, take
the reins. Cebriones did as he had said. Hector thereon with a loud cry
sprang from his chariot to the ground, and seizing a great stone made
straight for Teucer with intent to kill him. Teucer had just taken an
arrow from his quiver and had laid it upon the bowstring, but Hector
struck him with the jagged stone as he was taking aim and drawing the
string to his shoulder; he hit him just where the collar-bone divides the
neck from the chest, a very deadly place, and broke the sinew of his arm
so that his wrist was less, and the bow dropped from his hand as he fell
forward on his knees. Ajax saw that his brother had fallen, and running
towards him bestrode him and sheltered him with his shield. Meanwhile his
two trusty squires, Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor, came up and bore
him to the ships groaning in his great pain.



Jove now again put heart into the Trojans, and they drove the Achaeans to
their deep trench with Hector in all his glory at their head. As a hound
grips a wild boar or lion in flank or buttock when he gives him chase, and
watches warily for his wheeling, even so did Hector follow close upon the
Achaeans, ever killing the hindmost as they rushed panic-stricken onwards.
When they had fled through the set stakes and trench and many Achaeans had
been laid low at the hands of the Trojans, they halted at their ships,
calling upon one another and praying every man instantly as they lifted up
their hands to the gods; but Hector wheeled his horses this way and that,
his eyes glaring like those of Gorgo or murderous Mars.



Juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to Minerva,
“Alas, child of aegis-bearing Jove, shall you and I take no more thought
for the dying Danaans, though it be the last time we ever do so? See how
they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a single man.
Hector the son of Priam rages with intolerable fury, and has already done
great mischief.”



Minerva answered, “Would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own land,
and fall by the hands of the Achaeans; but my father Jove is mad with
spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. He forgets how often
I saved his son when he was worn out by the labours Eurystheus had laid on
him. He would weep till his cry came up to heaven, and then Jove would
send me down to help him; if I had had the sense to foresee all this, when
Eurystheus sent him to the house of Hades, to fetch the hell-hound from
Erebus, he would never have come back alive out of the deep waters of the
river Styx. And now Jove hates me, while he lets Thetis have her way
because she kissed his knees and took hold of his beard, when she was
begging him to do honour to Achilles. I shall know what to do next time he
begins calling me his grey-eyed darling. Get our horses ready, while I go
within the house of aegis-bearing Jove and put on my armour; we shall then
find out whether Priam’s son Hector will be glad to meet us in the
highways of battle, or whether the Trojans will glut hounds and vultures
with the fat of their flesh as they be dead by the ships of the Achaeans.”



Thus did she speak and white-armed Juno, daughter of great Saturn, obeyed
her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds, while
Minerva daughter of aegis-bearing Jove flung her richly vesture, made with
her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned the shirt of
Jove, arming herself for battle. Then she stepped into her flaming
chariot, and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and strong with which
she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno lashed her
horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open of their own
accord—gates over which the Hours preside, in whose hands are heaven
and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides them or to close
it. Through these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds.



But father Jove when he saw them from Ida was very angry, and sent winged
Iris with a message to them. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, turn them back,
and see that they do not come near me, for if we come to fighting there
will be mischief. This is what I say, and this is what I mean to do. I
will lame their horses for them; I will hurl them from their chariot, and
will break it in pieces. It will take them all ten years to heal the
wounds my lightning shall inflict upon them; my grey-eyed daughter will
then learn what quarrelling with her father means. I am less surprised and
angry with Juno, for whatever I say she always contradicts me.”



With this Iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights of Ida to
the lofty summits of Olympus. She met the goddesses at the outer gates of
its many valleys and gave them her message. “What,” said she, “are you
about? Are you mad? The son of Saturn forbids going. This is what he says,
and this is what he means to do, he will lame your horses for you, he will
hurl you from your chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take you
all ten years to heal the wounds his lightning will inflict upon you, that
you may learn, grey-eyed goddess, what quarrelling with your father means.
He is less hurt and angry with Juno, for whatever he says she always
contradicts him but you, bold hussy, will you really dare to raise your
huge spear in defiance of Jove?”



With this she left them, and Juno said to Minerva, “Of a truth, child of
aegis-bearing Jove, I am not for fighting men’s battles further in
defiance of Jove. Let them live or die as luck will have it, and let Jove
mete out his judgements upon the Trojans and Danaans according to his own
pleasure.”



She turned her steeds; the Hours presently unyoked them, made them fast to
their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot against the end wall of
the courtyard. The two goddesses then sat down upon their golden thrones,
amid the company of the other gods; but they were very angry.



Presently father Jove drove his chariot to Olympus, and entered the
assembly of gods. The mighty lord of the earthquake unyoked his horses for
him, set the car upon its stand, and threw a cloth over it. Jove then sat
down upon his golden throne and Olympus reeled beneath him. Minerva and
Juno sat alone, apart from Jove, and neither spoke nor asked him
questions, but Jove knew what they meant, and said, “Minerva and Juno, why
are you so angry? Are you fatigued with killing so many of your dear
friends the Trojans? Be this as it may, such is the might of my hands that
all the gods in Olympus cannot turn me; you were both of you trembling all
over ere ever you saw the fight and its terrible doings. I tell you
therefore-and it would have surely been—I should have struck you
with lightning, and your chariots would never have brought you back again
to Olympus.”



Minerva and Juno groaned in spirit as they sat side by side and brooded
mischief for the Trojans. Minerva sat silent without a word, for she was
in a furious passion and bitterly incensed against her father; but Juno
could not contain herself and said, “What, dread son of Saturn, are you
talking about? We know how great your power is, nevertheless we have
compassion upon the Danaan warriors who are perishing and coming to a bad
end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from actual fighting,
but we will make serviceable suggestions to the Argives, that they may not
all of them perish in your displeasure.”



And Jove answered, “To-morrow morning, Juno, if you choose to do so, you
will see the son of Saturn destroying large numbers of the Argives, for
fierce Hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the son of
Peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships’ sterns about
the body of Patroclus. Like it or no, this is how it is decreed; for aught
I care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath earth and sea, where
Iapetus and Saturn dwell in lone Tartarus with neither ray of light nor
breath of wind to cheer them. You may go on and on till you get there, and
I shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you are the greatest vixen
living.”



Juno made him no answer. The sun’s glorious orb now sank into Oceanus and
drew down night over the land. Sorry indeed were the Trojans when light
failed them, but welcome and thrice prayed for did darkness fall upon the
Achaeans.



Then Hector led the Trojans back from the ships, and held a council on the
open space near the river, where there was a spot clear of corpses. They
left their chariots and sat down on the ground to hear the speech he made
them. He grasped a spear eleven cubits long, the bronze point of which
gleamed in front of it, while the ring round the spear-head was of gold.
Spear in hand he spoke. “Hear me,” said he, “Trojans, Dardanians, and
allies. I deemed but now that I should destroy the ships and all the
Achaeans with them ere I went back to Ilius, but darkness came on too
soon. It was this alone that saved them and their ships upon the sea-shore.
Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of night, and prepare our suppers.
Take your horses out of their chariots and give them their feeds of corn;
then make speed to bring sheep and cattle from the city; bring wine also
and corn for your horses and gather much wood, that from dark till dawn we
may burn watchfires whose flare may reach to heaven. For the Achaeans may
try to fly beyond the sea by night, and they must not embark scatheless
and unmolested; many a man among them must take a dart with him to nurse
at home, hit with spear or arrow as he is leaping on board his ship, that
others may fear to bring war and weeping upon the Trojans. Moreover let
the heralds tell it about the city that the growing youths and
grey-bearded men are to camp upon its heaven-built walls. Let the women
each of them light a great fire in her house, and let watch be safely kept
lest the town be entered by surprise while the host is outside. See to it,
brave Trojans, as I have said, and let this suffice for the moment; at
daybreak I will instruct you further. I pray in hope to Jove and to the
gods that we may then drive those fate-sped hounds from our land, for ’tis
the fates that have borne them and their ships hither. This night,
therefore, let us keep watch, but with early morning let us put on our
armour and rouse fierce war at the ships of the Achaeans; I shall then
know whether brave Diomed the son of Tydeus will drive me back from the
ships to the wall, or whether I shall myself slay him and carry off his
blood-stained spoils. To-morrow let him show his mettle, abide my spear if
he dare. I ween that at break of day, he shall be among the first to fall
and many another of his comrades round him. Would that I were as sure of
being immortal and never growing old, and of being worshipped like Minerva
and Apollo, as I am that this day will bring evil to the Argives.”



Thus spoke Hector and the Trojans shouted applause. They took their
sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his own
chariot. They made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city, they
brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much wood. They
then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind carried
the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven—but the blessed gods partook
not thereof, for they bitterly hated Ilius with Priam and Priam’s people.
Thus high in hope they sat through the livelong night by the highways of
war, and many a watchfire did they kindle. As when the stars shine clear,
and the moon is bright—there is not a breath of air, not a peak nor
glade nor jutting headland but it stands out in the ineffable radiance
that breaks from the serene of heaven; the stars can all of them be told
and the heart of the shepherd is glad—even thus shone the watchfires
of the Trojans before Ilius midway between the ships and the river
Xanthus. A thousand camp-fires gleamed upon the plain, and in the glow of
each there sat fifty men, while the horses, champing oats and corn beside
their chariots, waited till dawn should come.

=== ILIAD BOOK 9 ===

The Embassy to Achilles.



Thus did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of blood-stained Rout, had
taken fast hold of the Achaeans, and their princes were all of them in
despair. As when the two winds that blow from Thrace—the north and
the northwest—spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main—in
a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack in
all directions—even thus troubled were the hearts of the Achaeans.



The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a council
man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste also himself to
call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly. Agamemnon shed
tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the side of some sheer
cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to the Achaeans. “My
friends,” said he, “princes and councillors of the Argives, the hand of
heaven has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn
promise that I should sack the city of Troy before returning, but he has
played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to Argos with
the loss of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who has laid many a
proud city in the dust as he will yet lay others, for his power is above
all. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say and sail back to our own
country, for we shall not take Troy.”



Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for a long while sat sorrowful
there, but they all held their peace, till at last Diomed of the loud
battle-cry made answer saying, “Son of Atreus, I will chide your folly, as
is my right in council. Be not then aggrieved that I should do so. In the
first place you attacked me before all the Danaans and said that I was a
coward and no soldier. The Argives young and old know that you did so. But
the son of scheming Saturn endowed you by halves only. He gave you honour
as the chief ruler over us, but valour, which is the highest both right
and might he did not give you. Sir, think you that the sons of the
Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike and cowardly as you say they are? If your
own mind is set upon going home—go—the way is open to you; the
many ships that followed you from Mycene stand ranged upon the sea-shore;
but the rest of us stay here till we have sacked Troy. Nay though these
too should turn homeward with their ships, Sthenelus and myself will still
fight on till we reach the goal of Ilius, for heaven was with us when we
came.”



The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words of Diomed, and
presently Nestor rose to speak. “Son of Tydeus,” said he, “in war your
prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all who are of your
own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light of what you say nor
gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end of the whole matter. You
are still young—you might be the youngest of my own children—still
you have spoken wisely and have counselled the chief of the Achaeans not
without discretion; nevertheless I am older than you and I will tell you
everything; therefore let no man, not even King Agamemnon, disregard my
saying, for he that foments civil discord is a clanless, hearthless
outlaw.



“Now, however, let us obey the behests of night and get our suppers, but
let the sentinels every man of them camp by the trench that is without the
wall. I am giving these instructions to the young men; when they have been
attended to, do you, son of Atreus, give your orders, for you are the most
royal among us all. Prepare a feast for your councillors; it is right and
reasonable that you should do so; there is abundance of wine in your
tents, which the ships of the Achaeans bring from Thrace daily. You have
everything at your disposal wherewith to entertain guests, and you have
many subjects. When many are got together, you can be guided by him whose
counsel is wisest—and sorely do we need shrewd and prudent counsel,
for the foe has lit his watchfires hard by our ships. Who can be other
than dismayed? This night will either be the ruin of our host, or save
it.”



Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The sentinels went
out in their armour under command of Nestor’s son Thrasymedes, a captain
of the host, and of the bold warriors Ascalaphus and Ialmenus: there were
also Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus, and the son of Creion, noble
Lycomedes. There were seven captains of the sentinels, and with each there
went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took their places
midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had done so they lit
their fires and got every man his supper.



The son of Atreus then bade many councillors of the Achaeans to his
quarters and prepared a great feast in their honour. They laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had enough
to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose counsel was ever truest, was the first
to lay his mind before them. He, therefore, with all sincerity and
goodwill addressed them thus.



“With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, will I
both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over much people. Jove,
moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold
righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you;
therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give ear,
and to out the counsel of another who shall have been minded to speak
wisely. All turns on you and on your commands, therefore I will say what I
think will be best. No man will be of a truer mind than that which has
been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered Achilles by taking the girl
Briseis from his tent against my judgment. I urged you not to do so, but
you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero whom heaven itself
had honoured—for you still hold the prize that had been awarded to
him. Now, however, let us think how we may appease him, both with presents
and fair speeches that may conciliate him.”



And King Agamemnon answered, “Sir, you have reproved my folly justly. I
was wrong. I own it. One whom heaven befriends is in himself a host, and
Jove has shown that he befriends this man by destroying much people of the
Achaeans. I was blinded with passion and yielded to my worser mind;
therefore I will make amends, and will give him great gifts by way of
atonement. I will tell them in the presence of you all. I will give him
seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of
gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and twelve strong horses that
have won races and carried off prizes. Rich, indeed, both in land and gold
is he that has as many prizes as my horses have won me. I will give him
seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom I chose for myself when he took
Lesbos—all of surpassing beauty. I will give him these, and with
them her whom I erewhile took from him, the daughter of Briseus; and I
swear a great oath that I never went up into her couch, nor have been with
her after the manner of men and women.



“All these things will I give him now, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe
me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we Achaeans are dividing
the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his liking;
furthermore let him take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen
herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, he
shall be my son-in-law and I will show him like honour with my own dear
son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. I have three
daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa, let him take the one of
his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of Peleus; I
will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his daughter, and will
give him seven well-established cities, Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire, where
there is grass; holy Pherae and the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also,
and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders
of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep;
they will honour him with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient
to his comfortable ordinances. All this will I do if he will now forgo his
anger. Let him then yield; it is only Hades who is utterly ruthless and
unyielding—and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to
mankind. Moreover I am older and more royal than himself. Therefore, let
him now obey me.”



Then Nestor answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon.
The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send chosen messengers,
who may go to the tent of Achilles son of Peleus without delay. Let those
go whom I shall name. Let Phoenix, dear to Jove, lead the way; let Ajax
and Ulysses follow, and let the heralds Odius and Eurybates go with them.
Now bring water for our hands, and bid all keep silence while we pray to
Jove the son of Saturn, if so be that he may have mercy upon us.” Patroclus adjusted his smartwatch before donning the borrowed armor.



Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. Men-servants poured
water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls
with wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his
drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings, and had drunk
each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from the tent of
Agamemnon son of Atreus; and Nestor, looking first to one and then to
another, but most especially at Ulysses, was instant with them that they
should prevail with the noble son of Peleus.



They went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed earnestly
to earth-encircling Neptune that the high spirit of the son of Aeacus
might incline favourably towards them. When they reached the ships and
tents of the Myrmidons, they found Achilles playing on a lyre, fair, of
cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. It was part of the
spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of Eetion, and he was
now diverting himself with it and singing the feats of heroes. He was
alone with Patroclus, who sat opposite to him and said nothing, waiting
till he should cease singing. Ulysses and Ajax now came in—Ulysses
leading the way—and stood before him. Achilles sprang from his seat
with the lyre still in his hand, and Patroclus, when he saw the strangers,
rose also. Achilles then greeted them saying, “All hail and welcome—you
must come upon some great matter, you, who for all my anger are still
dearest to me of the Achaeans.”



With this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered with
purple rugs; then he said to Patroclus who was close by him, “Son of
Menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the wine,
and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who are now
under my roof.”



Patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in front
of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also of a
goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held the meat while Achilles
chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits while the son
of Menoetius made the fire burn high. When the flame had died down, he
spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting them up and
setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them with salt. When
the meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed bread round the
table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt them their portions. Then
Achilles took his seat facing Ulysses against the opposite wall, and bade
his comrade Patroclus offer sacrifice to the gods; so he cast the
offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands upon the good things
that were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
Ajax made a sign to Phoenix, and when he saw this, Ulysses filled his cup
with wine and pledged Achilles.



“Hail,” said he, “Achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither in
the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat and
drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. Sir, we are in the face
of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we shall save
our fleet or lose it. The Trojans and their allies have camped hard by our
ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires throughout their host and
deem that nothing can now prevent them from falling on our fleet. Jove,
moreover, has sent his lightnings on their right; Hector, in all his
glory, rages like a maniac; confident that Jove is with him he fears
neither god nor man, but is gone raving mad, and prays for the approach of
day. He vows that he will hew the high sterns of our ships in pieces, set
fire to their hulls, and make havoc of the Achaeans while they are dazed
and smothered in smoke; I much fear that heaven will make good his
boasting, and it will prove our lot to perish at Troy far from our home in
Argos. Up, then, and late though it be, save the sons of the Achaeans who
faint before the fury of the Trojans. You will repent bitterly hereafter
if you do not, for when the harm is done there will be no curing it;
consider ere it be too late, and save the Danaans from destruction.



“My good friend, when your father Peleus sent you from Phthia to
Agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, ‘Son, Minerva and Juno will make
you strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the better part
is in goodwill. Eschew vain quarrelling, and the Achaeans old and young
will respect you more for doing so.’ These were his words, but you have
forgotten them. Even now, however, be appeased, and put away your anger
from you. Agamemnon will make you great amends if you will forgive him;
listen, and I will tell you what he has said in his tent that he will give
you. He will give you seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire,
and ten talents of gold; twenty iron cauldrons, and twelve strong horses
that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich indeed both in land and
gold is he who has as many prizes as these horses have won for Agamemnon.
Moreover he will give you seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom he
chose for himself, when you took Lesbos—all of surpassing beauty. He
will give you these, and with them her whom he erewhile took from you, the
daughter of Briseus, and he will swear a great oath, he has never gone up
into her couch nor been with her after the manner of men and women. All
these things will he give you now down, and if hereafter the gods
vouchsafe him to sack the city of Priam, you can come when we Achaeans are
dividing the spoil, and load your ship with gold and bronze to your
liking. You can take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen
herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, you
shall be his son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own
dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. Agamemnon has
three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa; you may take the
one of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of
Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his
daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, Cardamyle,
Enope, and Hire where there is grass; holy Pherae and the rich meadows of
Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near the sea,
and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there are rich in
cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though were a god,
and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. All this will he do if you
will now forgo your anger. Moreover, though you hate both him and his
gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the Achaeans who are being
harassed in all their host; they will honour you as a god, and you will
earn great glory at their hands. You might even kill Hector; he will come
within your reach, for he is infatuated, and declares that not a Danaan
whom the ships have brought can hold his own against him.”



Achilles answered, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, I should give you
formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no more
of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. Him do I hate even
as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides another in his
heart; therefore I will say what I mean. I will be appeased neither by
Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any other of the Danaans, for I see that I
have no thanks for all my fighting. He that fights fares no better than he
that does not; coward and hero are held in equal honour, and death deals
like measure to him who works and him who is idle. I have taken nothing by
all my hardships—with my life ever in my hand; as a bird when she
has found a morsel takes it to her nestlings, and herself fares hardly,
even so many a long night have I been wakeful, and many a bloody battle
have I waged by day against those who were fighting for their women. With
my ships I have taken twelve cities, and eleven round about Troy have I
stormed with my men by land; I took great store of wealth from every one
of them, but I gave all up to Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed where he
was by his ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much
himself.



“Nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the chieftains
and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the Achaeans did he
take the woman in whom I delighted—let him keep her and sleep with
her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs fight the Trojans? What made the
son of Atreus gather the host and bring them? Was it not for the sake of
Helen? Are the sons of Atreus the only men in the world who love their
wives? Any man of common right feeling will love and cherish her who is
his own, as I this woman, with my whole heart, though she was but a
fruitling of my spear. Agamemnon has taken her from me; he has played me
false; I know him; let him tempt me no further, for he shall not move me.
Let him look to you, Ulysses, and to the other princes to save his ships
from burning. He has done much without me already. He has built a wall; he
has dug a trench deep and wide all round it, and he has planted it within
with stakes; but even so he stays not the murderous might of Hector. So
long as I fought the Achaeans Hector suffered not the battle range far
from the city walls; he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak
tree, but no further. Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape
my onset: now, however, since I am in no mood to fight him, I will
to-morrow offer sacrifice to Jove and to all the gods; I will draw my
ships into the water and then victual them duly; to-morrow morning, if you
care to look, you will see my ships on the Hellespont, and my men rowing
out to sea with might and main. If great Neptune vouchsafes me a fair
passage, in three days I shall be in Phthia. I have much there that I left
behind me when I came here to my sorrow, and I shall bring back still
further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and of iron, my share
of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize, he who gave has
insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid you, and tell him in
public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware of him should he think
that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery never fails him.



“As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. I will
take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in common with him.
He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen me further;
let him go his own way, for Jove has robbed him of his reason. I loathe
his presents, and for himself care not one straw. He may offer me ten or
even twenty times what he has now done, nay—not though it be all
that he has in the world, both now or ever shall have; he may promise me
the wealth of Orchomenus or of Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city
in the whole world, for it has a hundred gates through each of which two
hundred men may drive at once with their chariots and horses; he may offer
me gifts as the sands of the sea or the dust of the plain in multitude,
but even so he shall not move me till I have been revenged in full for the
bitter wrong he has done me. I will not marry his daughter; she may be
fair as Venus, and skilful as Minerva, but I will have none of her: let
another take her, who may be a good match for her and who rules a larger
kingdom. If the gods spare me to return home, Peleus will find me a wife;
there are Achaean women in Hellas and Phthia, daughters of kings that have
cities under them; of these I can take whom I will and marry her. Many a
time was I minded when at home in Phthia to woo and wed a woman who would
make me a suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father Peleus.
My life is more to me than all the wealth of Ilius while it was yet at
peace before the Achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies
on the stone floor of Apollo’s temple beneath the cliffs of Pytho. Cattle
and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both tripods and
horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left him it can
neither be bought nor harried back again.



“My mother Thetis tells me that there are two ways in which I may meet my
end. If I stay here and fight, I shall not return alive but my name will
live for ever: whereas if I go home my name will die, but it will be long
ere death shall take me. To the rest of you, then, I say, ‘Go home, for
you will not take Ilius.’ Jove has held his hand over her to protect her,
and her people have taken heart. Go, therefore, as in duty bound, and tell
the princes of the Achaeans the message that I have sent them; tell them
to find some other plan for the saving of their ships and people, for so
long as my displeasure lasts the one that they have now hit upon may not
be. As for Phoenix, let him sleep here that he may sail with me in the
morning if he so will. But I will not take him by force.”



They all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had
denied them, till presently the old knight Phoenix in his great fear for
the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and said, “Noble Achilles, if
you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of your anger will do
nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son, can I remain here
without you? Your father Peleus bade me go with you when he sent you as a
mere lad from Phthia to Agamemnon. You knew nothing neither of war nor of
the arts whereby men make their mark in council, and he sent me with you
to train you in all excellence of speech and action. Therefore, my son, I
will not stay here without you—no, not though heaven itself
vouchsafe to strip my years from off me, and make me young as I was when I
first left Hellas the land of fair women. I was then flying the anger of
father Amyntor, son of Ormenus, who was furious with me in the matter of
his concubine, of whom he was enamoured to the wronging of his wife my
mother. My mother, therefore, prayed me without ceasing to lie with the
woman myself, that so she hate my father, and in the course of time I
yielded. But my father soon came to know, and cursed me bitterly, calling
the dread Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no son of mine might ever sit
upon knees—and the gods, Jove of the world below and awful
Proserpine, fulfilled his curse. I took counsel to kill him, but some god
stayed my rashness and bade me think on men’s evil tongues and how I
should be branded as the murderer of my father; nevertheless I could not
bear to stay in my father’s house with him so bitter against me. My
cousins and clansmen came about me, and pressed me sorely to remain; many
a sheep and many an ox did they slaughter, and many a fat hog did they set
down to roast before the fire; many a jar, too, did they broach of my
father’s wine. Nine whole nights did they set a guard over me taking it in
turns to watch, and they kept a fire always burning, both in the cloister
of the outer court and in the inner court at the doors of the room wherein
I lay; but when the darkness of the tenth night came, I broke through the
closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the outer court after
passing quickly and unperceived through the men on guard and the women
servants. I then fled through Hellas till I came to fertile Phthia, mother
of sheep, and to King Peleus, who made me welcome and treated me as a
father treats an only son who will be heir to all his wealth. He made me
rich and set me over much people, establishing me on the borders of Phthia
where I was chief ruler over the Dolopians.



“It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you; I loved you with all my
heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone out
elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut up the dainty
morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your lips. Many a
time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness over my shirt; I
had infinite trouble with you, but I knew that heaven had vouchsafed me no
offspring of my own, and I made a son of you, Achilles, that in my hour of
need you might protect me. Now, therefore, I say battle with your pride
and beat it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might and majesty of
heaven are more than ours, but even heaven may be appeased; and if a man
has sinned he prays the gods, and reconciles them to himself by his
piteous cries and by frankincense, with drink-offerings and the savour of
burnt sacrifice. For prayers are as daughters to great Jove; halt,
wrinkled, with eyes askance, they follow in the footsteps of sin, who,
being fierce and fleet of foot, leaves them far behind him, and ever
baneful to mankind outstrips them even to the ends of the world; but
nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing after. If a man has
pity upon these daughters of Jove when they draw near him, they will bless
him and hear him too when he is praying; but if he deny them and will not
listen to them, they go to Jove the son of Saturn and pray that he may
presently fall into sin—to his ruing bitterly hereafter. Therefore,
Achilles, give these daughters of Jove due reverence, and bow before them
as all good men will bow. Were not the son of Atreus offering you gifts
and promising others later—if he were still furious and implacable—I
am not he that would bid you throw off your anger and help the Achaeans,
no matter how great their need; but he is giving much now, and more
hereafter; he has sent his captains to urge his suit, and has chosen those
who of all the Argives are most acceptable to you; make not then their
words and their coming to be of none effect. Your anger has been righteous
so far. We have heard in song how heroes of old time quarrelled when they
were roused to fury, but still they could be won by gifts, and fair words
could soothe them. Achilles paused to check his bronze pager before returning to the battle line.



“I have an old story in my mind—a very old one—but you are all
friends and I will tell it. The Curetes and the Aetolians were fighting
and killing one another round Calydon—the Aetolians defending the
city and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For Diana of the golden throne
was angry and did them hurt because Oeneus had not offered her his harvest
first-fruits. The other gods had all been feasted with hecatombs, but to
the daughter of great Jove alone he had made no sacrifice. He had
forgotten her, or somehow or other it had escaped him, and this was a
grievous sin. Thereon the archer goddess in her displeasure sent a
prodigious creature against him—a savage wild boar with great white
tusks that did much harm to his orchard lands, uprooting apple-trees in
full bloom and throwing them to the ground. But Meleager son of Oeneus got
huntsmen and hounds from many cities and killed it—for it was so
monstrous that not a few were needed, and many a man did it stretch upon
his funeral pyre. On this the goddess set the Curetes and the Aetolians
fighting furiously about the head and skin of the boar.



“So long as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the Curetes,
and for all their numbers they could not hold their ground under the city
walls; but in the course of time Meleager was angered as even a wise man
will sometimes be. He was incensed with his mother Althaea, and therefore
stayed at home with his wedded wife fair Cleopatra, who was daughter of
Marpessa daughter of Euenus, and of Ides the man then living. He it was
who took his bow and faced King Apollo himself for fair Marpessa’s sake;
her father and mother then named her Alcyone, because her mother had
mourned with the plaintive strains of the halcyon-bird when Phoebus Apollo
had carried her off. Meleager, then, stayed at home with Cleopatra,
nursing the anger which he felt by reason of his mother’s curses. His
mother, grieving for the death of her brother, prayed the gods, and beat
the earth with her hands, calling upon Hades and on awful Proserpine; she
went down upon her knees and her bosom was wet with tears as she prayed
that they would kill her son—and Erinys that walks in darkness and
knows no ruth heard her from Erebus.



“Then was heard the din of battle about the gates of Calydon, and the dull
thump of the battering against their walls. Thereon the elders of the
Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest of their priests, and
begged him to come out and help them, promising him a great reward. They
bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile in the plain of
Calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open plough-land. The old
warrior Oeneus implored him, standing at the threshold of his room and
beating the doors in supplication. His sisters and his mother herself
besought him sore, but he the more refused them; those of his comrades who
were nearest and dearest to him also prayed him, but they could not move
him till the foe was battering at the very doors of his chamber, and the
Curetes had scaled the walls and were setting fire to the city. Then at
last his sorrowing wife detailed the horrors that befall those whose city
is taken; she reminded him how the men are slain, and the city is given
over to the flames, while the women and children are carried into
captivity; when he heard all this, his heart was touched, and he donned
his armour to go forth. Thus of his own inward motion he saved the city of
the Aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that
they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing by
it. Be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into any
such course. When the ships are burning it will be a harder matter to save
them. Take the gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honour you as a
god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat the battle
back, but you will not be held in like honour.”



And Achilles answered, “Phoenix, old friend and father, I have no need of
such honour. I have honour from Jove himself, which will abide with me at
my ships while I have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong. I say
further—and lay my saying to your heart—vex me no more with
this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of Atreus. Love
him so well, and you may lose the love I bear you. You ought to help me
rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as I am, and
share like honour with myself; the others shall take my answer; stay here
yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we will consider
whether to remain or go.”



On this he nodded quietly to Patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare a
bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. Ajax son of
Telamon then said, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, let us be gone, for I
see that our journey is vain. We must now take our answer, unwelcome
though it be, to the Danaans who are waiting to receive it. Achilles is
savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for the love his
comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. He is implacable—and
yet if a man’s brother or son has been slain he will accept a fine by way
of amends from him that killed him, and the wrong-doer having paid in full
remains in peace among his own people; but as for you, Achilles, the gods
have put a wicked unforgiving spirit in your heart, and this, all about
one single girl, whereas we now offer you the seven best we have, and much
else into the bargain. Be then of a more gracious mind, respect the
hospitality of your own roof. We are with you as messengers from the host
of the Danaans, and would fain be held nearest and dearest to yourself of
all the Achaeans.”



“Ajax,” replied Achilles, “noble son of Telamon, you have spoken much to
my liking, but my blood boils when I think it all over, and remember how
the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as though I were some vile
tramp, and that too in the presence of the Argives. Go, then, and deliver
your message; say that I will have no concern with fighting till Hector,
son of noble Priam, reaches the tents of the Myrmidons in his murderous
course, and flings fire upon their ships. For all his lust of battle, I
take it he will be held in check when he is at my own tent and ship.”



On this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings,
and went back to the ships, Ulysses leading the way. But Patroclus told
his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for Phoenix;
they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of fine linen.
The old man then laid himself down and waited till morning came. But
Achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter of Phorbas
lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from Lesbos. Patroclus lay on the
other side of the room, and with him fair Iphis whom Achilles had given
him when he took Scyros the city of Enyeus.



When the envoys reached the tents of the son of Atreus, the Achaeans rose,
pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. King Agamemnon
was the first to do so. “Tell me, Ulysses,” said he, “will he save the
ships from burning, or did he refuse, and is he still furious?”



Ulysses answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever, and
spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you take counsel with the Achaeans
to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he said that
at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. He said further that
he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that you will not
reach the goal of Ilius. ‘Jove,’ he said, ‘has laid his hand over the city
to protect it, and the people have taken heart.’ This is what he said, and
the others who were with me can tell you the same story—Ajax and the
two heralds, men, both of them, who may be trusted. The old man Phoenix
stayed where he was to sleep, for so Achilles would have it, that he might
go home with him in the morning if he so would; but he will not take him
by force.”



They all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected, by
reason of the sternness with which Achilles had refused them, till
presently Diomed said, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,
you ought not to have sued the son of Peleus nor offered him gifts. He is
proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his pride still
further. Let him stay or go as he will. He will fight later when he is in
the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now, therefore, let
us all do as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill, let us then take our
rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay. But when fair
rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out your host and your
horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on, and yourself fighting
among the foremost.”



Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. They then made
their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where they laid
down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.

=== ILIAD BOOK 10 ===

Ulysses and Diomed go out as spies, and meet Dolon, who gives them
information: they then kill him, and profiting by what he had told them,
kill Rhesus king of the Thracians and take his horses.



Now the other princes of the Achaeans slept soundly the whole night
through, but Agamemnon son of Atreus was troubled, so that he could get no
rest. As when fair Juno’s lord flashes his lightning in token of great
rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground, or again as a
sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so did Agamemnon
heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within him. When he looked
upon the plain of Troy he marvelled at the many watchfires burning in
front of Ilius, and at the sound of pipes and flutes and of the hum of
men, but when presently he turned towards the ships and hosts of the
Achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls before Jove on high, and groaned
aloud for the very disquietness of his soul. In the end he deemed it best
to go at once to Nestor son of Neleus, and see if between them they could
find any way of the Achaeans from destruction. He therefore rose, put on
his shirt, bound his sandals about his comely feet, flung the skin of a
huge tawny lion over his shoulders—a skin that reached his feet—and
took his spear in his hand.



Neither could Menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the Argives who
for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the Trojans. He
covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther, put a casque of
bronze upon his head, and took his spear in his brawny hand. Then he went
to rouse his brother, who was by far the most powerful of the Achaeans,
and was honoured by the people as though he were a god. He found him by
the stern of his ship already putting his goodly array about his
shoulders, and right glad was he that his brother had come.



Menelaus spoke first. “Why,” said he, “my dear brother, are you thus
arming? Are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the Trojans?
I greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy upon the
enemy alone in the dead of night. It will be a deed of great daring.”



And King Agamemnon answered, “Menelaus, we both of us need shrewd counsel
to save the Argives and our ships, for Jove has changed his mind, and
inclines towards Hector’s sacrifices rather than ours. I never saw nor
heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one day as Hector has
now wrought against the sons of the Achaeans—and that too of his own
unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor goddess. The Argives will
rue it long and deeply. Run, therefore, with all speed by the line of the
ships, and call Ajax and Idomeneus. Meanwhile I will go to Nestor, and bid
him rise and go about among the companies of our sentinels to give them
their instructions; they will listen to him sooner than to any man, for
his own son, and Meriones brother in arms to Idomeneus, are captains over
them. It was to them more particularly that we gave this charge.”



Menelaus replied, “How do I take your meaning? Am I to stay with them and
wait your coming, or shall I return here as soon as I have given your
orders?” “Wait,” answered King Agamemnon, “for there are so many paths
about the camp that we might miss one another. Call every man on your way,
and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and by his father’s name,
give each all titular observance, and stand not too much upon your own
dignity; we must take our full share of toil, for at our birth Jove laid
this heavy burden upon us.”



With these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went on to
Nestor shepherd of his people. He found him sleeping in his tent hard by
his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him—his shield, his two
spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle with which
the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people into battle—for
his age stayed him not. He raised himself on his elbow and looked up at
Agamemnon. “Who is it,” said he, “that goes thus about the host and the
ships alone and in the dead of night, when men are sleeping? Are you
looking for one of your mules or for some comrade? Do not stand there and
say nothing, but speak. What is your business?”



And Agamemnon answered, “Nestor, son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, it is I, Agamemnon son of Atreus, on whom Jove has laid labour and
sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry me. I am
thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my heart is big
with war and with the jeopardy of the Achaeans. I am in great fear for the
Danaans. I am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart beats as though
it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. If then you can do
anything—for you too cannot sleep—let us go the round of the
watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to the
neglect of their duty. The enemy is encamped hard and we know not but he
may attack us by night.”



Nestor replied, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, Jove
will not do all for Hector that Hector thinks he will; he will have
troubles yet in plenty if Achilles will lay aside his anger. I will go
with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of Tydeus, or Ulysses,
or fleet Ajax and the valiant son of Phyleus. Some one had also better go
and call Ajax and King Idomeneus, for their ships are not near at hand but
the farthest of all. I cannot however refrain from blaming Menelaus, much
as I love him and respect him—and I will say so plainly, even at the
risk of offending you—for sleeping and leaving all this trouble to
yourself. He ought to be going about imploring aid from all the princes of
the Achaeans, for we are in extreme danger.”



And Agamemnon answered, “Sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for he
is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself—not indeed from
sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me to
take the lead. On this occasion, however, he was awake before I was, and
came to me of his own accord. I have already sent him to call the very men
whom you have named. And now let us be going. We shall find them with the
watch outside the gates, for it was there I said that we would meet them.”



“In that case,” answered Nestor, “the Argives will not blame him nor
disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them
instructions.”



With this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his comely
feet. He buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses, large, and of a
rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and
wended his way along the line of the Achaean ships. First he called loudly
to Ulysses peer of gods in counsel and woke him, for he was soon roused by
the sound of the battle-cry. He came outside his tent and said, “Why do
you go thus alone about the host, and along the line of the ships in the
stillness of the night? What is it that you find so urgent?” And Nestor
knight of Gerene answered, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, take it not
amiss, for the Achaeans are in great straits. Come with me and let us wake
some other, who may advise well with us whether we shall fight or fly.”



On this Ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about his
shoulders and came out with them. First they went to Diomed son of Tydeus,
and found him outside his tent clad in his armour with his comrades
sleeping round him and using their shields as pillows; as for their
spears, they stood upright on the spikes of their butts that were driven
into the ground, and the burnished bronze flashed afar like the lightning
of father Jove. The hero was sleeping upon the skin of an ox, with a piece
of fine carpet under his head; Nestor went up to him and stirred him with
his heel to rouse him, upbraiding him and urging him to bestir himself.
“Wake up,” he exclaimed, “son of Tydeus. How can you sleep on in this way?
Can you not see that the Trojans are encamped on the brow of the plain
hard by our ships, with but a little space between us and them?”



On these words Diomed leaped up instantly and said, “Old man, your heart
is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours. Are there no
younger men among the Achaeans who could go about to rouse the princes?
There is no tiring you.”



And Nestor knight of Gerene made answer, “My son, all that you have said
is true. I have good sons, and also much people who might call the
chieftains, but the Achaeans are in the gravest danger; life and death are
balanced as it were on the edge of a razor. Go then, for you are younger
than I, and of your courtesy rouse Ajax and the fleet son of Phyleus.”



Diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders—a
skin that reached his feet—and grasped his spear. When he had roused
the heroes, he brought them back with him; they then went the round of
those who were on guard, and found the captains not sleeping at their
posts but wakeful and sitting with their arms about them. As sheep dogs
that watch their flocks when they are yarded, and hear a wild beast coming
through the mountain forest towards them—forthwith there is a hue
and cry of dogs and men, and slumber is broken—even so was sleep
chased from the eyes of the Achaeans as they kept the watches of the
wicked night, for they turned constantly towards the plain whenever they
heard any stir among the Trojans. The old man was glad and bade them be of
good cheer. “Watch on, my children,” said he, “and let not sleep get hold
upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us.”



With this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the
Achaeans who had been called to the council. Meriones and the brave son of
Nestor went also, for the princes bade them. When they were beyond the
trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting on the open
ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it was here that when
night fell Hector had turned back from his onslaught on the Argives. They
sat down, therefore, and held debate with one another.



Nestor spoke first. “My friends,” said he, “is there any man bold enough
to venture among the Trojans, and cut off some straggler, or bring us news
of what the enemy mean to do whether they will stay here by the ships away
from the city, or whether, now that they have worsted the Achaeans, they
will retire within their walls. If he could learn all this and come back
safely here, his fame would be high as heaven in the mouths of all men,
and he would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs from all our ships would
each of them give him a black ewe with her lamb—which is a present
of surpassing value—and he would be asked as a guest to all feasts
and clan-gatherings.”



They all held their peace, but Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke saying,
“Nestor, gladly will I visit the host of the Trojans over against us, but
if another will go with me I shall do so in greater confidence and
comfort. When two men are together, one of them may see some opportunity
which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone he is less full
of resource, and his wit is weaker.”



On this several offered to go with Diomed. The two Ajaxes, servants of
Mars, Meriones, and the son of Nestor all wanted to go, so did Menelaus
son of Atreus; Ulysses also wished to go among the host of the Trojans,
for he was ever full of daring, and thereon Agamemnon king of men spoke
thus: “Diomed,” said he, “son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, choose
your comrade for yourself—take the best man of those that have
offered, for many would now go with you. Do not through delicacy reject
the better man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage, because
he is of more royal blood.”



He said this because he feared for Menelaus. Diomed answered, “If you bid
me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can I fail to think of
Ulysses, than whom there is no man more eager to face all kinds of danger—and
Pallas Minerva loves him well? If he were to go with me we should pass
safely through fire itself, for he is quick to see and understand.”



“Son of Tydeus,” replied Ulysses, “say neither good nor ill about me, for
you are among Argives who know me well. Let us be going, for the night
wanes and dawn is at hand. The stars have gone forward, two-thirds of the
night are already spent, and the third is alone left us.”



They then put on their armour. Brave Thrasymedes provided the son of
Tydeus with a sword and a shield (for he had left his own at his ship) and
on his head he set a helmet of bull’s hide without either peak or crest;
it is called a skull-cap and is a common headgear. Meriones found a bow
and quiver for Ulysses, and on his head he set a leathern helmet that was
lined with a strong plaiting of leathern thongs, while on the outside it
was thickly studded with boar’s teeth, well and skilfully set into it;
next the head there was an inner lining of felt. This helmet had been
stolen by Autolycus out of Eleon when he broke into the house of Amyntor
son of Ormenus. He gave it to Amphidamas of Cythera to take to Scandea,
and Amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift to Molus, who gave it to his son
Meriones; and now it was set upon the head of Ulysses.



When the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other chieftains
behind them. Pallas Minerva sent them a heron by the wayside upon their
right hands; they could not see it for the darkness, but they heard its
cry. Ulysses was glad when he heard it and prayed to Minerva: “Hear me,”
he cried, “daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, you who spy out all my ways and
who are with me in all my hardships; befriend me in this mine hour, and
grant that we may return to the ships covered with glory after having
achieved some mighty exploit that shall bring sorrow to the Trojans.”



Then Diomed of the loud war-cry also prayed: “Hear me too,” said he,
“daughter of Jove, unweariable; be with me even as you were with my noble
father Tydeus when he went to Thebes as envoy sent by the Achaeans. He
left the Achaeans by the banks of the river Aesopus, and went to the city
bearing a message of peace to the Cadmeians; on his return thence, with
your help, goddess, he did great deeds of daring, for you were his ready
helper. Even so guide me and guard me now, and in return I will offer you
in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet
brought by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns and will offer her up
to you in sacrifice.”



Thus they prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard their prayer. When they had
done praying to the daughter of great Jove, they went their way like two
lions prowling by night amid the armour and blood-stained bodies of them
that had fallen.



Neither again did Hector let the Trojans sleep; for he too called the
princes and councillors of the Trojans that he might set his counsel
before them. “Is there one,” said he, “who for a great reward will do me
the service of which I will tell you? He shall be well paid if he will. I
will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest that can be
found at the ships of the Achaeans, if he will dare this thing; and he
will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships and find out
whether they are still guarded as heretofore, or whether now that we have
beaten them the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches.”



They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a certain man
named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald—a man rich in gold
and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. He it was that now addressed the Trojans. “I, Hector,”
said he, “Will to the ships and will exploit them. But first hold up your
sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot, bedight with bronze,
and the horses that now carry the noble son of Peleus. I will make you a
good scout, and will not fail you. I will go through the host from one end
to the other till I come to the ship of Agamemnon, where I take it the
princes of the Achaeans are now consulting whether they shall fight or
fly.”



When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his
oath saying, “May Jove the thundering husband of Juno bear witness that no
other Trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you shall
have your will with them for ever.”



The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on going. He
hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin of a
grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. Then he took a
pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not to return
with any news for Hector. When he had left the horses and the troops
behind him, he made all speed on his way, but Ulysses perceived his coming
and said to Diomed, “Diomed, here is some one from the camp; I am not sure
whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who would plunder the
bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we can then spring upon
him and take him. If, however, he is too quick for us, go after him with
your spear and hem him in towards the ships away from the Trojan camp, to
prevent his getting back to the town.”



With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about as
far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that has
been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than oxen)
they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood still, for
he made sure they were friends from the Trojan camp come by Hector’s
orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a spear’s cast, or
less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran as fast as his
legs could take him. The others gave chase at once, and as a couple of
well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that runs screaming
in front of them, even so did the son of Tydeus and Ulysses pursue Dolon
and cut him off from his own people. But when he had fled so far towards
the ships that he would soon have fallen in with the outposts, Minerva
infused fresh strength into the son of Tydeus for fear some other of the
Achaeans might have the glory of being first to hit him, and he might
himself be only second; he therefore sprang forward with his spear and
said, “Stand, or I shall throw my spear, and in that case I shall soon
make an end of you.”



He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart flew over
the man’s right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground. He stood stock
still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth chattered, and he turned
pale with fear. The two came breathless up to him and seized his hands,
whereon he began to weep and said, “Take me alive; I will ransom myself;
we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this my
father will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he hear of my
being alive at the ships of the Achaeans.”



“Fear not,” replied Ulysses, “let no thought of death be in your mind; but
tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in the dead
of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while other men are
sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or did Hector send you
to spy out what was going on at the ships? Or did you come here of your
own mere notion?”



Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: “Hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. He said he would
give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus and his bronze-bedizened
chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the flying night, get close
to the enemy, and find out whether the ships are still guarded as
heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten them, the Achaeans design
to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their
watches.”



Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “You had indeed set your heart upon a
great reward, but the horses of the descendant of Aeacus are hardly to be
kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than Achilles himself,
whose mother was an immortal. But tell me, and tell me true, where did you
leave Hector when you started? Where lies his armour and his horses? How,
too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the Trojans ordered? What are
their plans? Will they stay here by the ships and away from the city, or
now that they have worsted the Achaeans, will they retire within their
walls?”



And Dolon answered, “I will tell you truly all. Hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great Ilus, away
from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me, there
is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. The Trojans have their
watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore, are awake
and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the allies who have
come from other places are asleep and leave it to the Trojans to keep
guard, for their wives and children are not here.”



Ulysses then said, “Now tell me; are they sleeping among the Trojan
troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may understand it.”



“I will tell you truly all,” replied Dolon. “To the seaward lie the
Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians, and the noble
Pelasgi. The Lycians and proud Mysians, with the Phrygians and Meonians,
have their place on the side towards Thymbra; but why ask about all this?
If you want to find your way into the host of the Trojans, there are the
Thracians, who have lately come here and lie apart from the others at the
far end of the camp; and they have Rhesus son of Eioneus for their king.
His horses are the finest and strongest that I have ever seen, they are
whiter than snow and fleeter than any wind that blows. His chariot is
bedight with silver and gold, and he has brought his marvellous golden
armour, of the rarest workmanship—too splendid for any mortal man to
carry, and meet only for the gods. Now, therefore, take me to the ships or
bind me securely here, until you come back and have proved my words
whether they be false or true.”



Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, “Think not, Dolon, for all the
good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you are in
our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come some second
time to the ships of the Achaeans either as a spy or as an open enemy, but
if I kill you and an end of you, you will give no more trouble.”



On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him further,
but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword and cut
through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he was
yet speaking. They took the ferret skin cap from his head, and also the
wolf-skin, the bow, and his long spear. Ulysses hung them up aloft in
honour of Minerva the goddess of plunder, and prayed saying, “Accept
these, goddess, for we give them to you in preference to all the gods in
Olympus: therefore speed us still further towards the horses and
sleeping-ground of the Thracians.”



With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk tree, and
they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering boughs of tamarisk
that they might not miss it as they came back through the flying hours of
darkness. The two then went onwards amid the fallen armour and the blood,
and came presently to the company of Thracian soldiers, who were sleeping,
tired out with their day’s toil; their goodly armour was lying on the
ground beside them all orderly in three rows, and each man had his yoke of
horses beside him. Rhesus was sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his
horses were made fast to the topmost rim of his chariot. Ulysses from some
way off saw him and said, “This, Diomed, is the man, and these are the
horses about which Dolon whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost;
dally not about your armour, but loose the horses at once—or else
kill the men yourself, while I see to the horses.”



Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he smote them
right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they were being hacked
about, and the earth was red with their blood. As a lion springs furiously
upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds them without their shepherd,
so did the son of Tydeus set upon the Thracian soldiers till he had killed
twelve. As he killed them Ulysses came and drew them aside by their feet
one by one, that the horses might go forward freely without being
frightened as they passed over the dead bodies, for they were not yet used
to them. When the son of Tydeus came to the king, he killed him too (which
made thirteen), as he was breathing hard, for by the counsel of Minerva an
evil dream, the seed of Oeneus, hovered that night over his head.
Meanwhile Ulysses untied the horses, made them fast one to another and
drove them off, striking them with his bow, for he had forgotten to take
the whip from the chariot. Then he whistled as a sign to Diomed.



But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed he might
accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot in which the
king’s armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift the
armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill some
more Thracians. While he was thus hesitating Minerva came up to him and
said, “Get back, Diomed, to the ships or you may be driven thither, should
some other god rouse the Trojans.”



Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the horses.
Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the ships of the
Achaeans.



But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the son of
Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of the Trojans he
roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians and a noble kinsman of
Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no
longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their death-agony;
on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by name. Then the
whole Trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept hurrying together,
and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who had now got away towards
the ships.



When they reached the place where they had killed Hector’s scout, Ulysses
stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the ground, placed
the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses and remounted: then he
lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward nothing loth towards the
ships as though of their own free will. Nestor was first to hear the tramp
of their feet. “My friends,” said he, “princes and counsellors of the
Argives, shall I guess right or wrong?—but I must say what I think:
there is a sound in my ears as of the tramp of horses. I hope it may be
Diomed and Ulysses driving in horses from the Trojans, but I much fear
that the bravest of the Argives may have come to some harm at their
hands.”



He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted,
whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them and congratulated
them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to question them. “Tell me,” said
he, “renowned Ulysses, how did you two come by these horses? Did you steal
in among the Trojan forces, or did some god meet you and give them to you?
They are like sunbeams. I am well conversant with the Trojans, for old
warrior though I am I never hold back by the ships, but I never yet saw or
heard of such horses as these are. Surely some god must have met you and
given them to you, for you are both of you dear to Jove, and to Jove’s
daughter Minerva.”



And Ulysses answered, “Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name,
heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these, for the
gods are far mightier than we are. These horses, however, about which you
ask me, are freshly come from Thrace. Diomed killed their king with the
twelve bravest of his companions. Hard by the ships we took a thirteenth
man—a scout whom Hector and the other Trojans had sent as a spy upon
our ships.”



He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the strongly built
quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs of leather
to the manger, where the steeds of Diomed stood eating their sweet corn,
but Ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of Dolon at the stern of his
ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to Minerva. As for
themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat from their bodies,
and from their necks and thighs. When the sea-water had taken all the
sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they went into the baths and
washed themselves. After they had so done and had anointed themselves with
oil, they sat down to table, and drawing from a full mixing-bowl, made a
drink-offering of wine to Minerva.

=== ILIAD BOOK 11 ===

In the forenoon the fight is equal, but Agamemnon turns the fortune of the
day towards the Achaeans until he gets wounded and leaves the field—Hector
then drives everything before him till he is wounded by Diomed—Paris
wounds Diomed—Ulysses, Nestor, and Idomeneus perform prodigies of
valour—Machaon is wounded—Nestor drives him off in his chariot—Achilles
sees the pair driving towards the camp and sends Patroclus to ask who it
is that is wounded—This is the beginning of evil for Patroclus—Nestor
makes a long speech.



And now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord with the ensign
of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans. She took her stand by
the huge black hull of Ulysses’ ship which was middlemost of all, so that
her voice might carry farthest on either side, on the one hand towards the
tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards those of Achilles—for
these two heroes, well assured of their own strength, had valorously drawn
up their ships at the two ends of the line. There she took her stand, and
raised a cry both loud and shrill that filled the Achaeans with courage,
giving them heart to fight resolutely and with all their might, so that
they had rather stay there and do battle than go home in their ships.



The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird themselves for
battle while he put on his armour. First he girded his goodly greaves
about his legs, making them fast with ankle-clasps of silver; and about
his chest he set the breastplate which Cinyras had once given him as a
guest-gift. It had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus that the Achaeans
were about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave it to the king. It had
ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold, and ten of tin. There were
serpents of cyanus that reared themselves up towards the neck, three upon
either side, like the rainbows which the son of Saturn has set in heaven
as a sign to mortal men. About his shoulders he threw his sword, studded
with bosses of gold; and the scabbard was of silver with a chain of gold
wherewith to hang it. He took moreover the richly-dight shield that
covered his body when he was in battle—fair to see, with ten circles
of bronze running all round it. On the body of the shield there were
twenty bosses of white tin, with another of dark cyanus in the middle:
this last was made to show a Gorgon’s head, fierce and grim, with Rout and
Panic on either side. The band for the arm to go through was of silver, on
which there was a writhing snake of cyanus with three heads that sprang
from a single neck, and went in and out among one another. On his head
Agamemnon set a helmet, with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of
horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two
redoubtable bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him
as a flame into the firmament, while Juno and Minerva thundered in honour
of the king of rich Mycene.



Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold them in
readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in full
armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. The chiefs were
armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but these came up
presently. The son of Saturn sent a portent of evil sound about their
host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to send many a
brave man hurrying down to Hades.



The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas who was honoured by
the Trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of Antenor, Polybus,
Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a god. Hector’s round shield showed
in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines for a moment
through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath them; even so was
Hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in the hindermost, and
his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of aegis-bearing Jove.



And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich
man’s land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did the
Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were in no mood for
yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side got the better of the
other. Discord was glad as she beheld them, for she was the only god that
went among them; the others were not there, but stayed quietly each in his
own home among the dells and valleys of Olympus. All of them blamed the
son of Saturn for wanting to give victory to the Trojans, but father Jove
heeded them not: he held aloof from all, and sat apart in his all-glorious
majesty, looking down upon the city of the Trojans, the ships of the
Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and alike upon the slayers and on the
slain.



Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their darts rained
thick on one another and the people perished, but as the hour drew nigh
when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get his midday meal—for
he has felled till his hands are weary; he is tired out, and must now have
food—then the Danaans with a cry that rang through all their ranks,
broke the battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon led them on, and slew first
Bienor, a leader of his people, and afterwards his comrade and charioteer
Oileus, who sprang from his chariot and was coming full towards him; but
Agamemnon struck him on the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was
of no avail against the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so
that his brains were battered in and he was killed in full fight.



Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went on to kill
Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a bastard, the other born in
wedlock; they were in the same chariot—the bastard driving, while
noble Antiphus fought beside him. Achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of Ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now, however,
Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above the nipple with his
spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear and threw him from his
chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly armour from off them and
recognized them, for he had already seen them at ships when Achilles
brought them in from Ida. As a lion fastens on the fawns of a hind and
crushes them in his great jaws, robbing them of their tender life while he
on his way back to his lair—the hind can do nothing for them even
though she be close by, for she is in an agony of fear, and flies through
the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost speed before the mighty
monster—so, no man of the Trojans could help Isus and Antiphus, for
they were themselves flying in panic before the Argives.



Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and brave
Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in preventing Helen’s
being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely bribed by Alexandrus; and
now Agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same chariot, trying to bring
their horses to a stand—for they had lost hold of the reins and the
horses were mad with fear. The son of Atreus sprang upon them like a lion,
and the pair besought him from their chariot. “Take us alive,” they cried,
“son of Atreus, and you shall receive a great ransom for us. Our father
Antimachus has great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from
this he will satisfy you with a very large ransom should he hear of our
being alive at the ships of the Achaeans.”



With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. “If,” said Agamemnon, “you are sons of
Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans proposed that Menelaus and
Ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not suffered
to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your father.”



As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting him
on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the
ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did Agamemnon smite; he cut off his
hands and his head—which he sent rolling in among the crowd as
though it were a ball. There he let them both lie, and wherever the ranks
were thickest thither he flew, while the other Achaeans followed. Foot
soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them, and slew
them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering tramp of the
horses raised a cloud of dust from off the plain. King Agamemnon followed
after, ever slaying them and cheering on the Achaeans. As when some mighty
forest is all ablaze—the eddying gusts whirl fire in all directions
till the thickets shrivel and are consumed before the blast of the flame—even
so fell the heads of the flying Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and many a noble pair of steeds drew an empty chariot along the highways
of war, for lack of drivers who were lying on the plain, more useful now
to vultures than to their wives.



Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din of
battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to the
Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus, son of Dardanus, in the
middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making always
for the city—the son of Atreus still shouting, and with hands all
bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the Scaean gates and the oak
tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up. Meanwhile
the Trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like a herd of
cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in the dead of
night—he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the grip of his
strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges himself upon her
entrails—even so did King Agamemnon son of Atreus pursue the foe,
ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him. Many a
man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son of Atreus,
for he wielded his spear with fury.



But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the father
of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat, thunderbolt in
hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida. He then told Iris of the
golden wings to carry a message for him. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, and
speak thus to Hector—say that so long as he sees Agamemnon heading
his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, he is to keep aloof and bid
the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon is wounded
either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then will I vouchsafe
him strength to slay till he reach the ships and night falls at the going
down of the sun.”



Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the crests
of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his chariot and horses.
Then she said, “Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in counsel, father Jove
has sent me to bear you this message—so long as you see Agamemnon
heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, you are to keep
aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon
is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then will
Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you reach the ships, and till
night falls at the going down of the sun.”



When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full armed from
his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring the
dread strife of battle. The Trojans then wheeled round, and again met the
Achaeans, while the Argives on their part strengthened their battalions.
The battle was now in array and they stood face to face with one another,
Agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to be ahead of all
others.



Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who, whether
of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face Agamemnon? It was
Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and of great stature, who was
brought up in fertile Thrace, the mother of sheep. Cisses, his mother’s
father, brought him up in his own house when he was a child—Cisses,
father to fair Theano. When he reached manhood, Cisses would have kept him
there, and was for giving him his daughter in marriage, but as soon as he
had married he set out to fight the Achaeans with twelve ships that
followed him: these he had left at Percote and had come on by land to
Ilius. He it was that now met Agamemnon son of Atreus. When they were
close up with one another, the son of Atreus missed his aim, and Iphidamas
hit him on the girdle below the cuirass and then flung himself upon him,
trusting to his strength of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor
nearly so, for the point of the spear struck against the silver and was
turned aside as though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from his
hand, and drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his
sword, and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the neck. So there the poor
fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the defence
of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he had had no
joy though he had given much for her: he had given a hundred head of
cattle down, and had promised later on to give a thousand sheep and goats
mixed, from the countless flocks of which he was possessed. Agamemnon son
of Atreus then despoiled him, and carried off his armour into the host of
the Achaeans.



When noble Coon, Antenor’s eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his eyes
at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon he got beside him,
spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm below the elbow,
the point of the spear going right through the arm. Agamemnon was
convulsed with pain, but still not even for this did he leave off
struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that flew as fleet as the
wind, and sprang upon Coon who was trying to drag off the body of his
brother—his father’s son—by the foot, and was crying for help
to all the bravest of his comrades; but Agamemnon struck him with a
bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body through
the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut off his head,
standing over the body of Iphidamas. Thus did the sons of Antenor meet
their fate at the hands of the son of Atreus, and go down into the house
of Hades.



As long as the blood still welled warm from his wound Agamemnon went about
attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with great
handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased to flow and the wound
grew dry, the pain became great. As the sharp pangs which the Eilithuiae,
goddesses of childbirth, daughters of Juno and dispensers of cruel pain,
send upon a woman when she is in labour—even so sharp were the pangs
of the son of Atreus. He sprang on to his chariot, and bade his charioteer
drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. With a loud clear voice he
shouted to the Danaans, “My friends, princes and counsellors of the
Argives, defend the ships yourselves, for Jove has not suffered me to
fight the whole day through against the Trojans.”



With this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and they
flew forward nothing loth. Their chests were white with foam and their
bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of the battle.



When Hector saw Agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the Trojans and
Lycians saying, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanian warriors, be men, my
friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best man has left
them, and Jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge the foe with your
chariots that you may win still greater glory.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman
hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did Hector, peer
of Mars, hound the proud Trojans on against the Achaeans. Full of hope he
plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like some fierce
tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its deep blue waters
into fury.



What, then is the full tale of those whom Hector son of Priam killed in
the hour of triumph which Jove then vouchsafed him? First Asaeus,
Autonous, and Opites; Dolops son of Clytius, Opheltius and Agelaus;
Aesymnus, Orus and Hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains of the
Achaeans did Hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and file. As when
the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south and beats them down
with the fierceness of its fury—the waves of the sea roll high, and
the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering wind—even so
thick were the heads of them that fell by the hand of Hector.



All had then been lost and no help for it, and the Achaeans would have
fled pell-mell to their ships, had not Ulysses cried out to Diomed, “Son
of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we thus forget our prowess? Come,
my good fellow, stand by my side and help me, we shall be shamed for ever
if Hector takes the ships.”



And Diomed answered, “Come what may, I will stand firm; but we shall have
scant joy of it, for Jove is minded to give victory to the Trojans rather
than to us.”



With these words he struck Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground,
smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while Ulysses killed Molion
who was his squire. These they let lie, now that they had stopped their
fighting; the two heroes then went on playing havoc with the foe, like two
wild boars that turn in fury and rend the hounds that hunt them. Thus did
they turn upon the Trojans and slay them, and the Achaeans were thankful
to have breathing time in their flight from Hector.



They then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of Merops of
Percote, who excelled all others in the arts of divination. He had
forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they would not obey him, for fate
lured them to their fall. Diomed son of Tydeus slew them both and stripped
them of their armour, while Ulysses killed Hippodamus and Hypeirochus.



And now the son of Saturn as he looked down from Ida ordained that neither
side should have the advantage, and they kept on killing one another. The
son of Tydeus speared Agastrophus son of Paeon in the hip-joint with his
spear. His chariot was not at hand for him to fly with, so blindly
confident had he been. His squire was in charge of it at some distance and
he was fighting on foot among the foremost until he lost his life. Hector
soon marked the havoc Diomed and Ulysses were making, and bore down upon
them with a loud cry, followed by the Trojan ranks; brave Diomed was
dismayed when he saw them, and said to Ulysses who was beside him, “Great
Hector is bearing down upon us and we shall be undone; let us stand firm
and wait his onset.”



He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his mark.
He had aimed at Hector’s head near the top of his helmet, but bronze was
turned by bronze, and Hector was untouched, for the spear was stayed by
the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which Phoebus Apollo had
given him. Hector sprang back with a great bound under cover of the ranks;
he fell on his knees and propped himself with his brawny hand leaning on
the ground, for darkness had fallen on his eyes. The son of Tydeus having
thrown his spear dashed in among the foremost fighters, to the place where
he had seen it strike the ground; meanwhile Hector recovered himself and
springing back into his chariot mingled with the crowd, by which means he
saved his life. But Diomed made at him with his spear and said, “Dog, you
have again got away though death was close on your heels. Phoebus Apollo,
to whom I ween you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you,
nevertheless I will meet you and make an end of you hereafter, if there is
any god who will stand by me too and be my helper. For the present I must
pursue those I can lay hands on.”



As he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of Paeon, but
Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning against
a pillar of the monument which men had raised to Ilus son of Dardanus, a
ruler in days of old. Diomed had taken the cuirass from off the breast of
Agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the shield from off his shoulders,
when Paris drew his bow and let fly an arrow that sped not from his hand
in vain, but pierced the flat of Diomed’s right foot, going right through
it and fixing itself in the ground. Thereon Paris with a hearty laugh
sprang forward from his hiding-place, and taunted him saying, “You are
wounded—my arrow has not been shot in vain; would that it had hit
you in the belly and killed you, for thus the Trojans, who fear you as
goats fear a lion, would have had a truce from evil.”



Diomed all undaunted answered, “Archer, you who without your bow are
nothing, slanderer and seducer, if you were to be tried in single combat
fighting in full armour, your bow and your arrows would serve you in
little stead. Vain is your boast in that you have scratched the sole of my
foot. I care no more than if a girl or some silly boy had hit me. A
worthless coward can inflict but a light wound; when I wound a man though
I but graze his skin it is another matter, for my weapon will lay him low.
His wife will tear her cheeks for grief and his children will be
fatherless: there will he rot, reddening the earth with his blood, and
vultures, not women, will gather round him.”



Thus he spoke, but Ulysses came up and stood over him. Under this cover he
sat down to draw the arrow from his foot, and sharp was the pain he
suffered as he did so. Then he sprang on to his chariot and bade the
charioteer drive him to the ships, for he was sick at heart.



Ulysses was now alone; not one of the Argives stood by him, for they were
all panic-stricken. “Alas,” said he to himself in his dismay, “what will
become of me? It is ill if I turn and fly before these odds, but it will
be worse if I am left alone and taken prisoner, for the son of Saturn has
struck the rest of the Danaans with panic. But why talk to myself in this
way? Well do I know that though cowards quit the field, a hero, whether he
wound or be wounded, must stand firm and hold his own.”



While he was thus in two minds, the ranks of the Trojans advanced and
hemmed him in, and bitterly did they come to rue it. As hounds and lusty
youths set upon a wild boar that sallies from his lair whetting his white
tusks—they attack him from every side and can hear the gnashing of
his jaws, but for all his fierceness they still hold their ground—even
so furiously did the Trojans attack Ulysses. First he sprang spear in hand
upon Deiopites and wounded him on the shoulder with a downward blow; then
he killed Thoon and Ennomus. After these he struck Chersidamas in the
loins under his shield as he had just sprung down from his chariot; so he
fell in the dust and clutched the earth in the hollow of his hand. These
he let lie, and went on to wound Charops son of Hippasus own brother to
noble Socus. Socus, hero that he was, made all speed to help him, and when
he was close to Ulysses he said, “Far-famed Ulysses, insatiable of craft
and toil, this day you shall either boast of having killed both the sons
of Hippasus and stripped them of their armour, or you shall fall before my
spear.”



With these words he struck the shield of Ulysses. The spear went through
the shield and passed on through his richly wrought cuirass, tearing the
flesh from his side, but Pallas Minerva did not suffer it to pierce the
entrails of the hero. Ulysses knew that his hour was not yet come, but he
gave ground and said to Socus, “Wretch, you shall now surely die. You have
stayed me from fighting further with the Trojans, but you shall now fall
by my spear, yielding glory to myself, and your soul to Hades of the noble
steeds.”



Socus had turned in flight, but as he did so, the spear struck him in the
back midway between the shoulders, and went right through his chest. He
fell heavily to the ground and Ulysses vaunted over him saying, “O Socus,
son of Hippasus tamer of horses, death has been too quick for you and you
have not escaped him: poor wretch, not even in death shall your father and
mother close your eyes, but the ravening vultures shall enshroud you with
the flapping of their dark wings and devour you. Whereas even though I
fall the Achaeans will give me my due rites of burial.”



So saying he drew Socus’s heavy spear out of his flesh and from his
shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was withdrawn so that he
was much dismayed. When the Trojans saw that Ulysses was bleeding they
raised a great shout and came on in a body towards him; he therefore gave
ground, and called his comrades to come and help him. Thrice did he cry as
loudly as man can cry, and thrice did brave Menelaus hear him; he turned,
therefore, to Ajax who was close beside him and said, “Ajax, noble son of
Telamon, captain of your people, the cry of Ulysses rings in my ears, as
though the Trojans had cut him off and were worsting him while he is
single-handed. Let us make our way through the throng; it will be well
that we defend him; I fear he may come to harm for all his valour if he be
left without support, and the Danaans would miss him sorely.”



He led the way and mighty Ajax went with him. The Trojans had gathered
round Ulysses like ravenous mountain jackals round the carcase of some
horned stag that has been hit with an arrow—the stag has fled at
full speed so long as his blood was warm and his strength has lasted, but
when the arrow has overcome him, the savage jackals devour him in the
shady glades of the forest. Then heaven sends a fierce lion thither,
whereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them of their prey—even
so did Trojans many and brave gather round crafty Ulysses, but the hero
stood at bay and kept them off with his spear. Ajax then came up with his
shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by, whereon the Trojans fled
in all directions. Menelaus took Ulysses by the hand, and led him out of
the press while his squire brought up his chariot, but Ajax rushed
furiously on the Trojans and killed Doryclus, a bastard son of Priam; then
he wounded Pandocus, Lysandrus, Pyrasus, and Pylartes; as some swollen
torrent comes rushing in full flood from the mountains on to the plain,
big with the rain of heaven—many a dry oak and many a pine does it
engulf, and much mud does it bring down and cast into the sea—even
so did brave Ajax chase the foe furiously over the plain, slaying both men
and horses.



Hector did not yet know what Ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the
extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river Scamander, where the
carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round Nestor and brave
Idomeneus. Among these Hector was making great slaughter with his spear
and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to
him; still the Achaeans would have given no ground, had not Alexandrus
husband of lovely Helen stayed the prowess of Machaon, shepherd of his
people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed arrow.
The Achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned against them
the Trojans might take him prisoner, and Idomeneus said to Nestor, “Nestor
son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, mount your chariot at once;
take Machaon with you and drive your horses to the ships as fast as you
can. A physician is worth more than several other men put together, for he
can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs.”



Nestor knight of Gerene did as Idomeneus had counselled; he at once
mounted his chariot, and Machaon son of the famed physician Aesculapius,
went with him. He lashed his horses and they flew onward nothing loth
towards the ships, as though of their own free will.



Then Cebriones seeing the Trojans in confusion said to Hector from his
place beside him, “Hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing of
the battle, while the other Trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and their
horses. Ajax son of Telamon is driving them before him; I know him by the
breadth of his shield: let us turn our chariot and horses thither, where
horse and foot are fighting most desperately, and where the cry of battle
is loudest.”



With this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the whip they
drew the chariot full speed among the Achaeans and Trojans, over the
bodies and shields of those that had fallen: the axle was bespattered with
blood, and the rail round the car was covered with splashes both from the
horses’ hoofs and from the tyres of the wheels. Hector tore his way
through and flung himself into the thick of the fight, and his presence
threw the Danaans into confusion, for his spear was not long idle;
nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword and spear, and
throwing great stones, he avoided Ajax son of Telamon, for Jove would have
been angry with him if he had fought a better man than himself.



Then father Jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart of Ajax,
so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind him—looking
fearfully at the throng of his foes as though he were some wild beast, and
turning hither and thither but crouching slowly backwards. As peasants
with their hounds chase a lion from their stockyard, and watch by night to
prevent his carrying off the pick of their herd—he makes his greedy
spring, but in vain, for the darts from many a strong hand fall thick
around him, with burning brands that scare him for all his fury, and when
morning comes he slinks foiled and angry away—even so did Ajax,
sorely against his will, retreat angrily before the Trojans, fearing for
the ships of the Achaeans. Or as some lazy ass that has had many a cudgel
broken about his back, when he into a field begins eating the corn—boys
beat him but he is too many for them, and though they lay about with their
sticks they cannot hurt him; still when he has had his fill they at last
drive him from the field—even so did the Trojans and their allies
pursue great Ajax, ever smiting the middle of his shield with their darts.
Now and again he would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions of
the Trojans, and then he would again retreat; but he prevented any of them
from making his way to the ships. Single-handed he stood midway between
the Trojans and Achaeans: the spears that sped from their hands stuck some
of them in his mighty shield, while many, though thirsting for his blood,
fell to the ground ere they could reach him to the wounding of his fair
flesh.



Now when Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon saw that Ajax was being
overpowered by the rain of arrows, he went up to him and hurled his spear.
He struck Apisaon son of Phausius in the liver below the midriff, and laid
him low. Eurypylus sprang upon him, and stripped the armour from his
shoulders; but when Alexandrus saw him, he aimed an arrow at him which
struck him in the right thigh; the arrow broke, but the point that was
left in the wound dragged on the thigh; he drew back, therefore, under
cover of his comrades to save his life, shouting as he did so to the
Danaans, “My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, rally to the
defence of Ajax who is being overpowered, and I doubt whether he will come
out of the fight alive. Hither, then, to the rescue of great Ajax son of
Telamon.”



Even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near, and
gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their shoulders so
as to give him cover. Ajax then made towards them, and turned round to
stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men.



Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the mares of
Neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing Nestor out of the fight,
and with him Machaon shepherd of his people. Achilles saw and took note,
for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the hard stress and
struggle of the fight. He called from the ship to his comrade Patroclus,
who heard him in the tent and came out looking like Mars himself—here
indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently befell him. “Why,” said
he, “Achilles, do you call me? What do you want with me?” And Achilles
answered, “Noble son of Menoetius, man after my own heart, I take it that
I shall now have the Achaeans praying at my knees, for they are in great
straits; go, Patroclus, and ask Nestor who it is that he is bearing away
wounded from the field; from his back I should say it was Machaon son of
Aesculapius, but I could not see his face for the horses went by me at
full speed.”



Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running by
the ships and tents of the Achaeans.



When Nestor and Machaon had reached the tents of the son of Neleus, they
dismounted, and an esquire, Eurymedon, took the horses from the chariot.
The pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the sweat from
their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and took their
seats. Fair Hecamede, whom Nestor had had awarded to him from Tenedos when
Achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter of wise Arsinous,
and the Achaeans had given her to Nestor because he excelled all of them
in counsel. First she set for them a fair and well-made table that had
feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of bronze and an onion to give
relish to the drink, with honey and cakes of barley-meal. There was also a
cup of rare workmanship which the old man had brought with him from home,
studded with bosses of gold; it had four handles, on each of which there
were two golden doves feeding, and it had two feet to stand on. Any one
else would hardly have been able to lift it from the table when it was
full, but Nestor could do so quite easily. In this the woman, as fair as a
goddess, mixed them a mess with Pramnian wine; she grated goat’s milk
cheese into it with a bronze grater, threw in a handful of white
barley-meal, and having thus prepared the mess she bade them drink it.
When they had done so and had thus quenched their thirst, they fell
talking with one another, and at this moment Patroclus appeared at the
door.



When the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led him
into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but Patroclus stood
where he was and said, “Noble sir, I may not stay, you cannot persuade me
to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled with, and he bade me
ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing away from the field. I
can now see for myself that he is Machaon, shepherd of his people. I must
go back and tell Achilles. You, sir, know what a terrible man he is, and
how ready to blame even where no blame should lie.”



And Nestor answered, “Why should Achilles care to know how many of the
Achaeans may be wounded? He recks not of the dismay that reigns in our
host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave Diomed, son of
Tydeus, is wounded; so are Ulysses and Agamemnon; Eurypylus has been hit
with an arrow in the thigh, and I have just been bringing this man from
the field—he too wounded with an arrow. Nevertheless, Achilles, so
valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. Will he wait till the
ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the other?
As for me, I have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would that I were
still young and strong as in the days when there was a fight between us
and the men of Elis about some cattle-raiding. I then killed Itymoneus,
the valiant son of Hypeirochus, a dweller in Elis, as I was driving in the
spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown by my hand while fighting in the front
rank in defence of his cows, so he fell and the country people around him
were in great fear. We drove off a vast quantity of booty from the plain,
fifty herds of cattle and as many flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of
pigs, and as many wide-spreading flocks of goats. Of horses, moreover, we
seized a hundred and fifty, all of them mares, and many had foals running
with them. All these did we drive by night to Pylus, the city of Neleus,
taking them within the city; and the heart of Neleus was glad in that I
had taken so much, though it was the first time I had ever been in the
field. At daybreak the heralds went round crying that all in Elis to whom
there was a debt owing should come; and the leading Pylians assembled to
divide the spoils. There were many to whom the Epeans owed chattels, for
we men of Pylus were few and had been oppressed with wrong; in former
years Hercules had come, and had laid his hand heavy upon us, so that all
our best men had perished. Neleus had had twelve sons, but I alone was
left; the others had all been killed. The Epeans presuming upon all this
had looked down upon us and had done us much evil. My father chose a herd
of cattle and a great flock of sheep—three hundred in all—and
he took their shepherds with him, for there was a great debt due to him in
Elis, to wit four horses, winners of prizes. They and their chariots with
them had gone to the games and were to run for a tripod, but King Augeas
took them, and sent back their driver grieving for the loss of his horses.
Neleus was angered by what he had both said and done, and took great value
in return, but he divided the rest, that no man might have less than his
full share.



“Thus did we order all things, and offer sacrifices to the gods throughout
the city; but three days afterwards the Epeans came in a body, many in
number, they and their chariots, in full array, and with them the two
Moliones in their armour, though they were still lads and unused to
fighting. Now there is a certain town, Thryoessa, perched upon a rock on
the river Alpheus, the border city of Pylus. This they would destroy, and
pitched their camp about it, but when they had crossed their whole plain,
Minerva darted down by night from Olympus and bade us set ourselves in
array; and she found willing soldiers in Pylos, for the men meant
fighting. Neleus would not let me arm, and hid my horses, for he said that
as yet I could know nothing about war; nevertheless Minerva so ordered the
fight that, all on foot as I was, I fought among our mounted forces and
vied with the foremost of them. There is a river Minyeius that falls into
the sea near Arene, and there they that were mounted (and I with them)
waited till morning, when the companies of foot soldiers came up with us
in force. Thence in full panoply and equipment we came towards noon to the
sacred waters of the Alpheus, and there we offered victims to almighty
Jove, with a bull to Alpheus, another to Neptune, and a herd-heifer to
Minerva. After this we took supper in our companies, and laid us down to
rest each in his armour by the river.



“The Epeans were beleaguering the city and were determined to take it, but
ere this might be there was a desperate fight in store for them. When the
sun’s rays began to fall upon the earth we joined battle, praying to Jove
and to Minerva, and when the fight had begun, I was the first to kill my
man and take his horses—to wit the warrior Mulius. He was son-in-law
to Augeas, having married his eldest daughter, golden-haired Agamede, who
knew the virtues of every herb which grows upon the face of the earth. I
speared him as he was coming towards me, and when he fell headlong in the
dust, I sprang upon his chariot and took my place in the front ranks. The
Epeans fled in all directions when they saw the captain of their horsemen
(the best man they had) laid low, and I swept down on them like a
whirlwind, taking fifty chariots—and in each of them two men bit the
dust, slain by my spear. I should have even killed the two Moliones, sons
of Actor, unless their real father, Neptune lord of the earthquake, had
hidden them in a thick mist and borne them out of the fight. Thereon Jove
vouchsafed the Pylians a great victory, for we chased them far over the
plain, killing the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought
our horses to Buprasium, rich in wheat, and to the Olenian rock, with the
hill that is called Alision, at which point Minerva turned the people
back. There I slew the last man and left him; then the Achaeans drove
their horses back from Buprasium to Pylos and gave thanks to Jove among
the gods, and among mortal men to Nestor.



“Such was I among my peers, as surely as ever was, but Achilles is for
keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter when
the host is being cut to pieces. My good friend, did not Menoetius charge
you thus, on the day when he sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon? Ulysses
and I were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to you; for we
came to the fair house of Peleus while beating up recruits throughout all
Achaea, and when we got there we found Menoetius and yourself, and
Achilles with you. The old knight Peleus was in the outer court, roasting
the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to Jove the lord of thunder; and he held a
gold chalice in his hand from which he poured drink-offerings of wine over
the burning sacrifice. You two were busy cutting up the heifer, and at
that moment we stood at the gates, whereon Achilles sprang to his feet,
led us by the hand into the house, placed us at table, and set before us
such hospitable entertainment as guests expect. When we had satisfied
ourselves with meat and drink, I said my say and urged both of you to join
us. You were ready enough to do so, and the two old men charged you much
and straitly. Old Peleus bade his son Achilles fight ever among the
foremost and outvie his peers, while Menoetius the son of Actor spoke thus
to you: ‘My son,’ said he, ‘Achilles is of nobler birth than you are, but
you are older than he, though he is far the better man of the two. Counsel
him wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own
profit.’ Thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten;
nevertheless, even now, say all this to Achilles if he will listen to you.
Who knows but with heaven’s help you may talk him over, for it is good to
take a friend’s advice. If, however, he is fearful about some oracle, or
if his mother has told him something from Jove, then let him send you, and
let the rest of the Myrmidons follow with you, if perchance you may bring
light and saving to the Danaans. And let him send you into battle clad in
his own armour, that the Trojans may mistake you for him and leave off
fighting; the sons of the Achaeans may thus have time to get their breath,
for they are hard pressed and there is little breathing time in battle.
You, who are fresh, might easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and
away from the tents and ships.”



With these words he moved the heart of Patroclus, who set off running by
the line of the ships to Achilles, descendant of Aeacus. When he had got
as far as the ships of Ulysses, where was their place of assembly and
court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods, Eurypylus son
of Euaemon, met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow, and limping out
of the fight. Sweat rained from his head and shoulders, and black blood
welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not wander. The son of
Menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him and spoke piteously
saying, “O unhappy princes and counsellors of the Danaans, are you then
doomed to feed the hounds of Troy with your fat, far from your friends and
your native land? Say, noble Eurypylus, will the Achaeans be able to hold
great Hector in check, or will they fall now before his spear?”



Wounded Eurypylus made answer, “Noble Patroclus, there is no hope left for
the Achaeans but they will perish at their ships. All they that were
princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of the
Trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. But save me and take me to
your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood from off
it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs which, so they
say, have been shown you by Achilles, who was himself shown them by
Chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. For of the physicians
Podalirius and Machaon, I hear that the one is lying wounded in his tent
and is himself in need of healing, while the other is fighting the Trojans
upon the plain.”



“Hero Eurypylus,” replied the brave son of Menoetius, “how may these
things be? What can I do? I am on my way to bear a message to noble
Achilles from Nestor of Gerene, bulwark of the Achaeans, but even so I
will not be unmindful of your distress.”



With this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent, and a
servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground for him to
lie on. He laid him at full length and cut out the sharp arrow from his
thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with warm water; he then
crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his hands, and spread it upon
the wound; this was a virtuous herb which killed all pain; so the wound
presently dried and the blood left off flowing.

=== ILIAD BOOK 12 ===

The Trojans and their allies break the wall, led on by Hector.



So the son of Menoetius was attending to the hurt of Eurypylus within the
tent, but the Argives and Trojans still fought desperately, nor were the
trench and the high wall above it, to keep the Trojans in check longer.
They had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the trench all round
it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich spoils which they
had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the gods. It had been
built without the consent of the immortals, and therefore it did not last.
So long as Hector lived and Achilles nursed his anger, and so long as the
city of Priam remained untaken, the great wall of the Achaeans stood firm;
but when the bravest of the Trojans were no more, and many also of the
Argives, though some were yet left alive—when, moreover, the city
was sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back with their
ships to their own country—then Neptune and Apollo took counsel to
destroy the wall, and they turned on to it the streams of all the rivers
from Mount Ida into the sea, Rhesus, Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius,
Grenicus, Aesopus, and goodly Scamander, with Simois, where many a shield
and helm had fallen, and many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten
the dust. Phoebus Apollo turned the mouths of all these rivers together
and made them flow for nine days against the wall, while Jove rained the
whole time that he might wash it sooner into the sea. Neptune himself,
trident in hand, surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the
foundations of beams and stones which the Achaeans had laid with so much
toil; he made all level by the mighty stream of the Hellespont, and then
when he had swept the wall away he spread a great beach of sand over the
place where it had been. This done he turned the rivers back into their
old courses.



This was what Neptune and Apollo were to do in after time; but as yet
battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers rang
under the blows that rained upon them. The Argives, cowed by the scourge
of Jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of Hector the mighty
minister of Rout, who as heretofore fought with the force and fury of a
whirlwind. As a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on the dogs and men that
attack him, while these form a solid wall and shower their javelins as
they face him—his courage is all undaunted, but his high spirit will
be the death of him; many a time does he charge at his pursuers to scatter
them, and they fall back as often as he does so—even so did Hector
go about among the host exhorting his men, and cheering them on to cross
the trench.



But the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink, for the
width frightened them. They could neither jump it nor cross it, for it had
overhanging banks all round upon either side, above which there were the
sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaeans had planted so close and strong
as a defence against all who would assail it; a horse, therefore, could
not get into it and draw his chariot after him, but those who were on foot
kept trying their very utmost. Then Polydamas went up to Hector and said,
“Hector, and you other captains of the Trojans and allies, it is madness
for us to try and drive our horses across the trench; it will be very hard
to cross, for it is full of sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the
wall. Our horses therefore cannot get down into it, and would be of no use
if they did; moreover it is a narrow place and we should come to harm. If,
indeed, great Jove is minded to help the Trojans, and in his anger will
utterly destroy the Achaeans, I would myself gladly see them perish now
and here far from Argos; but if they should rally and we are driven back
from the ships pell-mell into the trench there will be not so much as a
man get back to the city to tell the tale. Now, therefore, let us all do
as I say; let our squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow
Hector in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their
doom is at hand the Achaeans will not be able to withstand us.”



Thus spoke Polydamas and his saying pleased Hector, who sprang in full
armour to the ground, and all the other Trojans, when they saw him do so,
also left their chariots. Each man then gave his horses over to his
charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. Then they
formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in five
bodies followed their leaders. Those that went with Hector and Polydamas
were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined to break
through the wall and fight at the ships. Cebriones was also joined with
them as third in command, for Hector had left his chariot in charge of a
less valiant soldier. The next company was led by Paris, Alcathous, and
Agenor; the third by Helenus and Deiphobus, two sons of Priam, and with
them was the hero Asius—Asius, the son of Hyrtacus, whose great
black horses of the breed that comes from the river Selleis had brought
him from Arisbe. Aeneas, the valiant son of Anchises, led the fourth; he
and the two sons of Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, men well versed in
all the arts of war. Sarpedon was captain over the allies, and took with
him Glaucus and Asteropaeus whom he deemed most valiant after himself—for
he was far the best man of them all. These helped to array one another in
their ox-hide shields, and then charged straight at the Danaans, for they
felt sure that they would not hold out longer and that they should
themselves now fall upon the ships.



The rest of the Trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of
Polydamas but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, would not leave his horses and his
esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with him towards
the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence. Nevermore
was he to return to wind-beaten Ilius, exulting in his chariot and his
horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name had overshadowed him
and he had fallen by the spear of Idomeneus the noble son of Deucalion. He
had driven towards the left wing of the ships, by which way the Achaeans
used to return with their chariots and horses from the plain. Hither he
drove and found the gates with their doors opened wide, and the great bar
down—for the gatemen kept them open so as to let those of their
comrades enter who might be flying towards the ships. Hither of set
purpose did he direct his horses, and his men followed him with a loud
cry, for they felt sure that the Achaeans would not hold out longer, and
that they should now fall upon the ships. Little did they know that at the
gates they should find two of the bravest chieftains, proud sons of the
fighting Lapithae—the one, Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, and
the other Leonteus, peer of murderous Mars. These stood before the gates
like two high oak trees upon the mountains, that tower from their
wide-spreading roots, and year after year battle with wind and rain—even
so did these two men await the onset of great Asius confidently and
without flinching. The Trojans led by him and by Iamenus, Orestes, Adamas
the son of Asius, Thoon and Oenomaus, raised a loud cry of battle and made
straight for the wall, holding their shields of dry ox-hide above their
heads; for a while the two defenders remained inside and cheered the
Achaeans on to stand firm in the defence of their ships; when, however,
they saw that the Trojans were attacking the wall, while the Danaans were
crying out for help and being routed, they rushed outside and fought in
front of the gates like two wild boars upon the mountains that abide the
attack of men and dogs, and charging on either side break down the wood
all round them tearing it up by the roots, and one can hear the clattering
of their tusks, till some one hits them and makes an end of them—even
so did the gleaming bronze rattle about their breasts, as the weapons fell
upon them; for they fought with great fury, trusting to their own prowess
and to those who were on the wall above them. These threw great stones at
their assailants in defence of themselves their tents and their ships. The
stones fell thick as the flakes of snow which some fierce blast drives
from the dark clouds and showers down in sheets upon the earth—even
so fell the weapons from the hands alike of Trojans and Achaeans. Helmet
and shield rang out as the great stones rained upon them, and Asius, the
son of Hyrtacus, in his dismay cried aloud and smote his two thighs.
“Father Jove,” he cried, “of a truth you too are altogether given to
lying. I made sure the Argive heroes could not withstand us, whereas like
slim-waisted wasps, or bees that have their nests in the rocks by the
wayside—they leave not the holes wherein they have built undefended,
but fight for their little ones against all who would take them—even
so these men, though they be but two, will not be driven from the gates,
but stand firm either to slay or be slain.”



He spoke, but moved not the mind of Jove, whose counsel it then was to
give glory to Hector. Meanwhile the rest of the Trojans were fighting
about the other gates; I, however, am no god to be able to tell about all
these things, for the battle raged everywhere about the stone wall as it
were a fiery furnace. The Argives, discomfited though they were, were
forced to defend their ships, and all the gods who were defending the
Achaeans were vexed in spirit; but the Lapithae kept on fighting with
might and main.



Thereon Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, hit Damasus with a spear upon
his cheek-pierced helmet. The helmet did not protect him, for the point of
the spear went through it, and broke the bone, so that the brain inside
was scattered about, and he died fighting. He then slew Pylon and Ormenus.
Leonteus, of the race of Mars, killed Hippomachus the son of Antimachus by
striking him with his spear upon the girdle. He then drew his sword and
sprang first upon Antiphates whom he killed in combat, and who fell face
upwards on the earth. After him he killed Menon, Iamenus, and Orestes, and
laid them low one after the other.



While they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths
who were led on by Polydamas and Hector (and these were the greater part
and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through the wall
and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench, uncertain what they
should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven when they had essayed to
cross it—a soaring eagle that flew skirting the left wing of their
host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its talons still alive and
struggling to escape. The snake was still bent on revenge, wriggling and
twisting itself backwards till it struck the bird that held it, on the
neck and breast; whereon the bird being in pain, let it fall, dropping it
into the middle of the host, and then flew down the wind with a sharp cry.
The Trojans were struck with terror when they saw the snake, portent of
aegis-bearing Jove, writhing in the midst of them, and Polydamas went up
to Hector and said, “Hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to
rebuke me, even when I speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth,
that one of the people should cross your will either in the field or at
the council board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless I
will say what I think will be best; let us not now go on to fight the
Danaans at their ships, for I know what will happen if this soaring eagle
which skirted the left wing of our host with a monstrous blood-red snake
in its talons (the snake being still alive) was really sent as an omen to
the Trojans on their essaying to cross the trench. The eagle let go her
hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her little ones, and so
will it be—with ourselves; even though by a mighty effort we break
through the gates and wall of the Achaeans, and they give way before us,
still we shall not return in good order by the way we came, but shall
leave many a man behind us whom the Achaeans will do to death in defence
of their ships. Thus would any seer who was expert in these matters, and
was trusted by the people, read the portent.”



Hector looked fiercely at him and said, “Polydamas, I like not of your
reading. You can find a better saying than this if you will. If, however,
you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your
reason. You would have me pay no heed to the counsels of Jove, nor to the
promises he made me—and he bowed his head in confirmation; you bid
me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl. What care I whether they
fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they be on my right hand or on my
left? Let us put our trust rather in the counsel of great Jove, king of
mortals and immortals. There is one omen, and one only—that a man
should fight for his country. Why are you so fearful? Though we be all of
us slain at the ships of the Argives you are not likely to be killed
yourself, for you are not steadfast nor courageous. If you will not fight,
or would talk others over from doing so, you shall fall forthwith before
my spear.”



With these words he led the way, and the others followed after with a cry
that rent the air. Then Jove the lord of thunder sent the blast of a
mighty wind from the mountains of Ida, that bore the dust down towards the
ships; he thus lulled the Achaeans into security, and gave victory to
Hector and to the Trojans, who, trusting to their own might and to the
signs he had shown them, essayed to break through the great wall of the
Achaeans. They tore down the breastworks from the walls, and overthrew the
battlements; they upheaved the buttresses, which the Achaeans had set in
front of the wall in order to support it; when they had pulled these down
they made sure of breaking through the wall, but the Danaans still showed
no sign of giving ground; they still fenced the battlements with their
shields of ox-hide, and hurled their missiles down upon the foe as soon as
any came below the wall.



The two Ajaxes went about everywhere on the walls cheering on the
Achaeans, giving fair words to some while they spoke sharply to any one
whom they saw to be remiss. “My friends,” they cried, “Argives one and all—good
bad and indifferent, for there was never fight yet, in which all were of
equal prowess—there is now work enough, as you very well know, for
all of you. See that you none of you turn in flight towards the ships,
daunted by the shouting of the foe, but press forward and keep one another
in heart, if it may so be that Olympian Jove the lord of lightning will
vouchsafe us to repel our foes, and drive them back towards the city.”



Thus did the two go about shouting and cheering the Achaeans on. As the
flakes that fall thick upon a winter’s day, when Jove is minded to snow
and to display these his arrows to mankind—he lulls the wind to
rest, and snows hour after hour till he has buried the tops of the high
mountains, the headlands that jut into the sea, the grassy plains, and the
tilled fields of men; the snow lies deep upon the forelands, and havens of
the grey sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it that it can
come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a mantle, so heavy are
the heavens with snow—even thus thickly did the stones fall on one
side and on the other, some thrown at the Trojans, and some by the Trojans
at the Achaeans; and the whole wall was in an uproar.



Still the Trojans and brave Hector would not yet have broken down the
gates and the great bar, had not Jove turned his son Sarpedon against the
Argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. Before him he held his
shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten so fair and round,
and had lined with ox-hides which he had made fast with rivets of gold all
round the shield; this he held in front of him, and brandishing his two
spears came on like some lion of the wilderness, who has been long
famished for want of meat and will dare break even into a well-fenced
homestead to try and get at the sheep. He may find the shepherds keeping
watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but he is in no mind to be
driven from the fold till he has had a try for it; he will either spring
on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit by a spear from some strong hand—even
so was Sarpedon fain to attack the wall and break down its battlements.
Then he said to Glaucus son of Hippolochus, “Glaucus, why in Lycia do we
receive especial honour as regards our place at table? Why are the
choicest portions served us and our cups kept brimming, and why do men
look up to us as though we were gods? Moreover we hold a large estate by
the banks of the river Xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing
land; it becomes us, therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the
Lycians and bear the brunt of the fight, that one may say to another, ‘Our
princes in Lycia eat the fat of the land and drink best of wine, but they
are fine fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front in battle.’ My
good friend, if, when we were once out of this fight, we could escape old
age and death thenceforward and forever, I should neither press forward
myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten thousand shapes hangs ever over
our heads, and no man can elude him; therefore let us go forward and
either win glory for ourselves, or yield it to another.”



Glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host of
Lycians. Menestheus son of Peteos was dismayed when he saw them, for it
was against his part of the wall that they came—bringing destruction
with them; he looked along the wall for some chieftain to support his
comrades and saw the two Ajaxes, men ever eager for the fray, and Teucer,
who had just come from his tent, standing near them; but he could not make
his voice heard by shouting to them, so great an uproar was there from
crashing shields and helmets and the battering of gates with a din which
reached the skies. For all the gates had been closed, and the Trojans were
hammering at them to try and break their way through them. Menestheus,
therefore, sent Thootes with a message to Ajax. “Run, good Thootes,” he
said, “and call Ajax, or better still bid both come, for it will be all
over with us here directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon us, men
who have ever fought desperately heretofore. But if they have too much on
their hands to let them come, at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon do so,
and let Teucer, the famous bowman, come with him.”



The messenger did as he was told, and set off running along the wall of
the Achaeans. When he reached the Ajaxes he said to them, “Sirs, princes
of the Argives, the son of noble Peteos bids you come to him for a while
and help him. You had better both come if you can, or it will be all over
with him directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon him, men who have
ever fought desperately heretofore; if you have too much on your hands to
let both come, at any rate let Ajax, son of Telamon, do so, and let
Teucer, the famous bowman, come with him.”



Great Ajax son of Telamon heeded the message, and at once spoke to the son
of Oileus. “Ajax,” said he, “do you two, yourself and brave Lycomedes,
stay here and keep the Danaans in heart to fight their hardest. I will go
over yonder, and bear my part in the fray, but I will come back here at
once as soon as I have given them the help they need.”



With this, Ajax son of Telamon set off, and Teucer, his brother by the
same father, went also, with Pandion to carry Teucer’s bow. They went
along inside the wall, and when they came to the tower where Menestheus
was (and hard pressed indeed did they find him) the brave captains and
leaders of the Lycians were storming the battlements as it were a thick
dark cloud, fighting in close quarters, and raising the battle-cry aloud.



First, Ajax son of Telamon killed brave Epicles, a comrade of Sarpedon,
hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the very
top of the wall. As men now are, even one who is in the bloom of youth
could hardly lift it with his two hands, but Ajax raised it high aloft and
flung it down, smashing Epicles’ four-crested helmet so that the bones of
his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high wall as though
he were diving, with no more life left in him. Then Teucer wounded Glaucus
the brave son of Hippolochus as he was coming on to attack the wall. He
saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at it, which made Glaucus leave
off fighting. Thereon he sprang covertly down for fear some of the
Achaeans might see that he was wounded and taunt him. Sarpedon was stung
with grief when he saw Glaucus leave him, still he did not leave off
fighting, but aimed his spear at Alcmaon the son of Thestor and hit him.
He drew his spear back again and Alcmaon came down headlong after it with
his bronzed armour rattling round him. Then Sarpedon seized the battlement
in his strong hands, and tugged at it till it all gave way together, and a
breach was made through which many might pass.



Ajax and Teucer then both of them attacked him. Teucer hit him with an
arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his body, but Jove
saved his son from destruction that he might not fall by the ships’
sterns. Meanwhile Ajax sprang on him and pierced his shield, but the spear
did not go clean through, though it hustled him back that he could come on
no further. He therefore retired a little space from the battlement, yet
without losing all his ground, for he still thought to cover himself with
glory. Then he turned round and shouted to the brave Lycians saying,
“Lycians, why do you thus fail me? For all my prowess I cannot break
through the wall and open a way to the ships single-handed. Come close on
behind me, for the more there are of us the better.”



The Lycians, shamed by his rebuke, pressed closer round him who was their
counsellor and their king. The Argives on their part got their men in
fighting order within the wall, and there was a deadly struggle between
them. The Lycians could not break through the wall and force their way to
the ships, nor could the Danaans drive the Lycians from the wall now that
they had once reached it. As two men, measuring-rods in hand, quarrel
about their boundaries in a field that they own in common, and stickle for
their rights though they be but in a mere strip, even so did the
battlements now serve as a bone of contention, and they beat one another’s
round shields for their possession. Many a man’s body was wounded with the
pitiless bronze, as he turned round and bared his back to the foe, and
many were struck clean through their shields; the wall and battlements
were everywhere deluged with the blood alike of Trojans and of Achaeans.
But even so the Trojans could not rout the Achaeans, who still held on;
and as some honest hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees
that the scales be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her
little ones, even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the
time came when Jove gave the greater glory to Hector son of Priam, who was
first to spring towards the wall of the Achaeans. When he had done so, he
cried aloud to the Trojans, “Up, Trojans, break the wall of the Argives,
and fling fire upon their ships.”



Thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at the
wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp spears
in their hands. Hector laid hold of a stone that lay just outside the
gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other; two of the best
men in a town, as men now are, could hardly raise it from the ground and
put it on to a waggon, but Hector lifted it quite easily by himself, for
the son of scheming Saturn made it light for him. As a shepherd picks up a
ram’s fleece with one hand and finds it no burden, so easily did Hector
lift the great stone and drive it right at the doors that closed the gates
so strong and so firmly set. These doors were double and high, and were
kept closed by two cross-bars to which there was but one key. When he had
got close up to them, Hector strode towards them that his blow might gain
in force and struck them in the middle, leaning his whole weight against
them. He broke both hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its
great weight. The portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars held no
longer, and the doors flew open, one one way, and the other the other,
through the force of the blow. Then brave Hector leaped inside with a face
as dark as that of flying night. The gleaming bronze flashed fiercely
about his body and he had two spears in his hand. None but a god could
have withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes
glared like fire. Then he turned round towards the Trojans and called on
them to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them—some of them at
once climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates. The
Danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all was uproar
and confusion.

=== ILIAD BOOK 13 ===

Neptune helps the Achaeans—The feats of Idomeneus—Hector at
the ships.



Now when Jove had thus brought Hector and the Trojans to the ships, he
left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his keen eyes away,
looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of Thrace, the Mysians,
fighters at close quarters, the noble Hippemolgi, who live on milk, and
the Abians, justest of mankind. He no longer turned so much as a glance
towards Troy, for he did not think that any of the immortals would go and
help either Trojans or Danaans.



But King Neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking
admiringly on the battle from his seat on the topmost crests of wooded
Samothrace, whence he could see all Ida, with the city of Priam and the
ships of the Achaeans. He had come from under the sea and taken his place
here, for he pitied the Achaeans who were being overcome by the Trojans;
and he was furiously angry with Jove.



Presently he came down from his post on the mountain top, and as he strode
swiftly onwards the high hills and the forest quaked beneath the tread of
his immortal feet. Three strides he took, and with the fourth he reached
his goal—Aegae, where is his glittering golden palace, imperishable,
in the depths of the sea. When he got there, he yoked his fleet
brazen-footed steeds with their manes of gold all flying in the wind; he
clothed himself in raiment of gold, grasped his gold whip, and took his
stand upon his chariot. As he went his way over the waves the sea-monsters
left their lairs, for they knew their lord, and came gambolling round him
from every quarter of the deep, while the sea in her gladness opened a
path before his chariot. So lightly did the horses fly that the bronze
axle of the car was not even wet beneath it; and thus his bounding steeds
took him to the ships of the Achaeans.



Now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea midway between
Tenedos and rocky Imbrus; here Neptune lord of the earthquake stayed his
horses, unyoked them, and set before them their ambrosial forage. He
hobbled their feet with hobbles of gold which none could either unloose or
break, so that they might stay there in that place until their lord should
return. This done he went his way to the host of the Achaeans.



Now the Trojans followed Hector son of Priam in close array like a
storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising the
cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of the
Achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. Meanwhile
earth-encircling Neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the Argives,
for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice of
Calchas.



First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, who were doing their best already, and
said, “Ajaxes, you two can be the saving of the Achaeans if you will put
out all your strength and not let yourselves be daunted. I am not afraid
that the Trojans, who have got over the wall in force, will be victorious
in any other part, for the Achaeans can hold all of them in check, but I
much fear that some evil will befall us here where furious Hector, who
boasts himself the son of great Jove himself, is leading them on like a
pillar of flame. May some god, then, put it into your hearts to make a
firm stand here, and to incite others to do the like. In this case you
will drive him from the ships even though he be inspired by Jove himself.”



As he spoke the earth-encircling lord of the earthquake struck both of
them with his sceptre and filled their hearts with daring. He made their
legs light and active, as also their hands and their feet. Then, as the
soaring falcon poises on the wing high above some sheer rock, and
presently swoops down to chase some bird over the plain, even so did
Neptune lord of the earthquake wing his flight into the air and leave
them. Of the two, swift Ajax son of Oileus was the first to know who it
was that had been speaking with them, and said to Ajax son of Telamon,
“Ajax, this is one of the gods that dwell on Olympus, who in the likeness
of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by our ships. It was not Calchas
the seer and diviner of omens; I knew him at once by his feet and knees as
he turned away, for the gods are soon recognised. Moreover I feel the lust
of battle burn more fiercely within me, while my hands and my feet under
me are more eager for the fray.”



And Ajax son of Telamon answered, “I too feel my hands grasp my spear more
firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; I long, moreover,
to meet furious Hector son of Priam, even in single combat.”



Thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with which the
god had filled them. Meanwhile the earth-encircler roused the Achaeans,
who were resting in the rear by the ships overcome at once by hard
fighting and by grief at seeing that the Trojans had got over the wall in
force. Tears began falling from their eyes as they beheld them, for they
made sure that they should not escape destruction; but the lord of the
earthquake passed lightly about among them and urged their battalions to
the front.



First he went up to Teucer and Leitus, the hero Peneleos, and Thoas and
Deipyrus; Meriones also and Antilochus, valiant warriors; all did he
exhort. “Shame on you young Argives,” he cried, “it was on your prowess I
relied for the saving of our ships; if you fight not with might and main,
this very day will see us overcome by the Trojans. Of a truth my eyes
behold a great and terrible portent which I had never thought to see—the
Trojans at our ships—they, who were heretofore like panic-stricken
hinds, the prey of jackals and wolves in a forest, with no strength but in
flight for they cannot defend themselves. Hitherto the Trojans dared not
for one moment face the attack of the Achaeans, but now they have sallied
far from their city and are fighting at our very ships through the
cowardice of our leader and the disaffection of the people themselves, who
in their discontent care not to fight in defence of the ships but are
being slaughtered near them. True, King Agamemnon son of Atreus is the
cause of our disaster by having insulted the son of Peleus, still this is
no reason why we should leave off fighting. Let us be quick to heal, for
the hearts of the brave heal quickly. You do ill to be thus remiss, you,
who are the finest soldiers in our whole army. I blame no man for keeping
out of battle if he is a weakling, but I am indignant with such men as you
are. My good friends, matters will soon become even worse through this
slackness; think, each one of you, of his own honour and credit, for the
hazard of the fight is extreme. Great Hector is now fighting at our ships;
he has broken through the gates and the strong bolt that held them.”



Thus did the earth-encircler address the Achaeans and urge them on.
Thereon round the two Ajaxes there gathered strong bands of men, of whom
not even Mars nor Minerva, marshaller of hosts could make light if they
went among them, for they were the picked men of all those who were now
awaiting the onset of Hector and the Trojans. They made a living fence,
spear to spear, shield to shield, buckler to buckler, helmet to helmet,
and man to man. The horse-hair crests on their gleaming helmets touched
one another as they nodded forward, so closely serried were they; the
spears they brandished in their strong hands were interlaced, and their
hearts were set on battle.



The Trojans advanced in a dense body, with Hector at their head pressing
right on as a rock that comes thundering down the side of some mountain
from whose brow the winter torrents have torn it; the foundations of the
dull thing have been loosened by floods of rain, and as it bounds headlong
on its way it sets the whole forest in an uproar; it swerves neither to
right nor left till it reaches level ground, but then for all its fury it
can go no further—even so easily did Hector for a while seem as
though he would career through the tents and ships of the Achaeans till he
had reached the sea in his murderous course; but the closely serried
battalions stayed him when he reached them, for the sons of the Achaeans
thrust at him with swords and spears pointed at both ends, and drove him
from them so that he staggered and gave ground; thereon he shouted to the
Trojans, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, fighters in close combat,
stand firm: the Achaeans have set themselves as a wall against me, but
they will not check me for long; they will give ground before me if the
mightiest of the gods, the thundering spouse of Juno, has indeed inspired
my onset.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Deiphobus son of
Priam went about among them intent on deeds of daring with his round
shield before him, under cover of which he strode quickly forward.
Meriones took aim at him with a spear, nor did he fail to hit the broad
orb of ox-hide; but he was far from piercing it for the spear broke in two
pieces long ere he could do so; moreover Deiphobus had seen it coming and
had held his shield well away from him. Meriones drew back under cover of
his comrades, angry alike at having failed to vanquish Deiphobus, and
having broken his spear. He turned therefore towards the ships and tents
to fetch a spear which he had left behind in his tent.



The others continued fighting, and the cry of battle rose up into the
heavens. Teucer son of Telamon was the first to kill his man, to wit, the
warrior Imbrius, son of Mentor, rich in horses. Until the Achaeans came he
had lived in Pedaeum, and had married Medesicaste, a bastard daughter of
Priam; but on the arrival of the Danaan fleet he had gone back to Ilius,
and was a great man among the Trojans, dwelling near Priam himself, who
gave him like honour with his own sons. The son of Telamon now struck him
under the ear with a spear which he then drew back again, and Imbrius fell
headlong as an ash-tree when it is felled on the crest of some high
mountain beacon, and its delicate green foliage comes toppling down to the
ground. Thus did he fall with his bronze-dight armour ringing harshly
round him, and Teucer sprang forward with intent to strip him of his
armour; but as he was doing so, Hector took aim at him with a spear.
Teucer saw the spear coming and swerved aside, whereon it hit Amphimachus,
son of Cteatus son of Actor, in the chest as he was coming into battle,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Hector sprang forward to take Amphimachus’s helmet from off his temples,
and in a moment Ajax threw a spear at him, but did not wound him, for he
was encased all over in his terrible armour; nevertheless the spear struck
the boss of his shield with such force as to drive him back from the two
corpses, which the Achaeans then drew off. Stichius and Menestheus,
captains of the Athenians, bore away Amphimachus to the host of the
Achaeans, while the two brave and impetuous Ajaxes did the like by
Imbrius. As two lions snatch a goat from the hounds that have it in their
fangs, and bear it through thick brushwood high above the ground in their
jaws, thus did the Ajaxes bear aloft the body of Imbrius, and strip it of
its armour. Then the son of Oileus severed the head from the neck in
revenge for the death of Amphimachus, and sent it whirling over the crowd
as though it had been a ball, till it fell in the dust at Hector’s feet.



Neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson Amphimachus should have
fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of the Achaeans to urge
the Danaans still further, and to devise evil for the Trojans. Idomeneus
met him, as he was taking leave of a comrade, who had just come to him
from the fight, wounded in the knee. His fellow-soldiers bore him off the
field, and Idomeneus having given orders to the physicians went on to his
tent, for he was still thirsting for battle. Neptune spoke in the likeness
and with the voice of Thoas son of Andraemon who ruled the Aetolians of
all Pleuron and high Calydon, and was honoured among his people as though
he were a god. “Idomeneus,” said he, “lawgiver to the Cretans, what has
now become of the threats with which the sons of the Achaeans used to
threaten the Trojans?”



And Idomeneus chief among the Cretans answered, “Thoas, no one, so far as
I know, is in fault, for we can all fight. None are held back neither by
fear nor slackness, but it seems to be the will of almighty Jove that the
Achaeans should perish ingloriously here far from Argos: you, Thoas, have
been always staunch, and you keep others in heart if you see any fail in
duty; be not then remiss now, but exhort all to do their utmost.”



To this Neptune lord of the earthquake made answer, “Idomeneus, may he
never return from Troy, but remain here for dogs to batten upon, who is
this day wilfully slack in fighting. Get your armour and go, we must make
all haste together if we may be of any use, though we are only two. Even
cowards gain courage from companionship, and we two can hold our own with
the bravest.”



Therewith the god went back into the thick of the fight, and Idomeneus
when he had reached his tent donned his armour, grasped his two spears,
and sallied forth. As the lightning which the son of Saturn brandishes
from bright Olympus when he would show a sign to mortals, and its gleam
flashes far and wide—even so did his armour gleam about him as he
ran. Meriones his sturdy squire met him while he was still near his tent
(for he was going to fetch his spear) and Idomeneus said:



“Meriones, fleet son of Molus, best of comrades, why have you left the
field? Are you wounded, and is the point of the weapon hurting you? or
have you been sent to fetch me? I want no fetching; I had far rather fight
than stay in my tent.”



“Idomeneus,” answered Meriones, “I come for a spear, if I can find one in
my tent; I have broken the one I had, in throwing it at the shield of
Deiphobus.”



And Idomeneus captain of the Cretans answered, “You will find one spear,
or twenty if you so please, standing up against the end wall of my tent. I
have taken them from Trojans whom I have killed, for I am not one to keep
my enemy at arm’s length; therefore I have spears, bossed shields,
helmets, and burnished corslets.”



Then Meriones said, “I too in my tent and at my ship have spoils taken
from the Trojans, but they are not at hand. I have been at all times
valorous, and wherever there has been hard fighting have held my own among
the foremost. There may be those among the Achaeans who do not know how I
fight, but you know it well enough yourself.”



Idomeneus answered, “I know you for a brave man: you need not tell me. If
the best men at the ships were being chosen to go on an ambush—and
there is nothing like this for showing what a man is made of; it comes out
then who is cowardly and who brave; the coward will change colour at every
touch and turn; he is full of fears, and keeps shifting his weight first
on one knee and then on the other; his heart beats fast as he thinks of
death, and one can hear the chattering of his teeth; whereas the brave man
will not change colour nor be frightened on finding himself in ambush, but
is all the time longing to go into action—if the best men were being
chosen for such a service, no one could make light of your courage nor
feats of arms. If you were struck by a dart or smitten in close combat, it
would not be from behind, in your neck nor back, but the weapon would hit
you in the chest or belly as you were pressing forward to a place in the
front ranks. But let us no longer stay here talking like children, lest we
be ill spoken of; go, fetch your spear from the tent at once.”



On this Meriones, peer of Mars, went to the tent and got himself a spear
of bronze. He then followed after Idomeneus, big with great deeds of
valour. As when baneful Mars sallies forth to battle, and his son Panic so
strong and dauntless goes with him, to strike terror even into the heart
of a hero—the pair have gone from Thrace to arm themselves among the
Ephyri or the brave Phlegyans, but they will not listen to both the
contending hosts, and will give victory to one side or to the other—even
so did Meriones and Idomeneus, captains of men, go out to battle clad in
their bronze armour. Meriones was first to speak. “Son of Deucalion,” said
he, “where would you have us begin fighting? On the right wing of the
host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where I take it the Achaeans
will be weakest?”



Idomeneus answered, “There are others to defend the centre—the two
Ajaxes and Teucer, who is the finest archer of all the Achaeans, and is
good also in a hand-to-hand fight. These will give Hector son of Priam
enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their
indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of Saturn fling a
firebrand upon them with his own hand. Great Ajax son of Telamon will
yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of Ceres, if
bronze and great stones can overthrow him. He would not yield even to
Achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none to
beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may know
forthwith whether we are to give glory to some other, or he to us.”



Meriones, peer of fleet Mars, then led the way till they came to the part
of the host which Idomeneus had named.



Now when the Trojans saw Idomeneus coming on like a flame of fire, him and
his squire clad in their richly wrought armour, they shouted and made
towards him all in a body, and a furious hand-to-hand fight raged under
the ships’ sterns. Fierce as the shrill winds that whistle upon a day when
dust lies deep on the roads, and the gusts raise it into a thick cloud—even
such was the fury of the combat, and might and main did they hack at each
other with spear and sword throughout the host. The field bristled with
the long and deadly spears which they bore. Dazzling was the sheen of
their gleaming helmets, their fresh-burnished breastplates, and glittering
shields as they joined battle with one another. Iron indeed must be his
courage who could take pleasure in the sight of such a turmoil, and look
on it without being dismayed.



Thus did the two mighty sons of Saturn devise evil for mortal heroes. Jove
was minded to give victory to the Trojans and to Hector, so as to do
honour to fleet Achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly
overthrow the Achaean host before Ilius, and only wanted to glorify Thetis
and her valiant son. Neptune on the other hand went about among the
Argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret, for he
was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the Trojans, and was furiously
angry with Jove. Both were of the same race and country, but Jove was
elder born and knew more, therefore Neptune feared to defend the Argives
openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on encouraging them throughout
their host. Thus, then, did these two devise a knot of war and battle,
that none could unloose or break, and set both sides tugging at it, to the
failing of men’s knees beneath them.



And now Idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey, called
loud on the Danaans and spread panic among the Trojans as he leaped in
among them. He slew Othryoneus from Cabesus, a sojourner, who had but
lately come to take part in the war. He sought Cassandra, the fairest of
Priam’s daughters, in marriage, but offered no gifts of wooing, for he
promised a great thing, to wit, that he would drive the sons of the
Achaeans willy nilly from Troy; old King Priam had given his consent and
promised her to him, whereon he fought on the strength of the promises
thus made to him. Idomeneus aimed a spear, and hit him as he came striding
on. His cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in his
belly, so that he fell heavily to the ground. Then Idomeneus vaunted over
him saying, “Othryoneus, there is no one in the world whom I shall admire
more than I do you, if you indeed perform what you have promised Priam son
of Dardanus in return for his daughter. We too will make you an offer; we
will give you the loveliest daughter of the son of Atreus, and will bring
her from Argos for you to marry, if you will sack the goodly city of Ilius
in company with ourselves; so come along with me, that we may make a
covenant at the ships about the marriage, and we will not be hard upon you
about gifts of wooing.”



With this Idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the thick of
the fight, but Asius came up to protect the body, on foot, in front of his
horses which his esquire drove so close behind him that he could feel
their breath upon his shoulder. He was longing to strike down Idomeneus,
but ere he could do so Idomeneus smote him with his spear in the throat
under the chin, and the bronze point went clean through it. He fell as an
oak, or poplar, or pine which shipwrights have felled for ship’s timber
upon the mountains with whetted axes—even thus did he lie full
length in front of his chariot and horses, grinding his teeth and
clutching at the blood-stained dust. His charioteer was struck with panic
and did not dare turn his horses round and escape: thereupon Antilochus
hit him in the middle of his body with a spear; his cuirass of bronze did
not protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly. He fell gasping from
his chariot and Antilochus, great Nestor’s son, drove his horses from the
Trojans to the Achaeans.



Deiphobus then came close up to Idomeneus to avenge Asius, and took aim at
him with a spear, but Idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided it, for he
was covered by the round shield he always bore—a shield of ox-hide
and bronze with two arm-rods on the inside. He crouched under cover of
this, and the spear flew over him, but the shield rang out as the spear
grazed it, and the weapon sped not in vain from the strong hand of
Deiphobus, for it struck Hypsenor son of Hippasus, shepherd of his people,
in the liver under the midriff, and his limbs failed beneath him.
Deiphobus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying, “Of a truth
Asius has not fallen unavenged; he will be glad even while passing into
the house of Hades, strong warden of the gate, that I have sent some one
to escort him.”



Thus did he vaunt, and the Argives were stung by his saying. Noble
Antilochus was more angry than any one, but grief did not make him forget
his friend and comrade. He ran up to him, bestrode him, and covered him
with his shield; then two of his staunch comrades, Mecisteus son of
Echius, and Alastor, stooped down, and bore him away groaning heavily to
the ships. But Idomeneus ceased not his fury. He kept on striving
continually either to enshroud some Trojan in the darkness of death, or
himself to fall while warding off the evil day from the Achaeans. Then
fell Alcathous son of noble Aesyetes; he was son-in-law to Anchises,
having married his eldest daughter Hippodameia, who was the darling of her
father and mother, and excelled all her generation in beauty,
accomplishments, and understanding, wherefore the bravest man in all Troy
had taken her to wife—him did Neptune lay low by the hand of
Idomeneus, blinding his bright eyes and binding his strong limbs in
fetters so that he could neither go back nor to one side, but stood stock
still like pillar or lofty tree when Idomeneus struck him with a spear in
the middle of his chest. The coat of mail that had hitherto protected his
body was now broken, and rang harshly as the spear tore through it. He
fell heavily to the ground, and the spear stuck in his heart, which still
beat, and made the butt-end of the spear quiver till dread Mars put an end
to his life. Idomeneus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice
saying, “Deiphobus, since you are in a mood to vaunt, shall we cry quits
now that we have killed three men to your one? Nay, sir, stand in fight
with me yourself, that you may learn what manner of Jove-begotten man am I
that have come hither. Jove first begot Minos, chief ruler in Crete, and
Minos in his turn begot a son, noble Deucalion. Deucalion begot me to be a
ruler over many men in Crete, and my ships have now brought me hither, to
be the bane of yourself, your father, and the Trojans.”



Thus did he speak, and Deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go back and
fetch some other Trojan to help him, or to take up the challenge
single-handed. In the end, he deemed it best to go and fetch Aeneas, whom
he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved with Priam
because in spite of his brave deeds he did not give him his due share of
honour. Deiphobus went up to him and said, “Aeneas, prince among the
Trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to defend the body
of your sister’s husband; come with me to the rescue of Alcathous, who
being husband to your sister brought you up when you were a child in his
house, and now Idomeneus has slain him.”



With these words he moved the heart of Aeneas, and he went in pursuit of
Idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but Idomeneus was not to be
thus daunted as though he were a mere child; he held his ground as a wild
boar at bay upon the mountains, who abides the coming of a great crowd of
men in some lonely place—the bristles stand upright on his back, his
eyes flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness to defend himself
against hounds and men—even so did famed Idomeneus hold his ground
and budge not at the coming of Aeneas. He cried aloud to his comrades
looking towards Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus, Meriones, and Antilochus,
all of them brave soldiers—“Hither my friends,” he cried, “and leave
me not single-handed—I go in great fear by fleet Aeneas, who is
coming against me, and is a redoubtable dispenser of death battle.
Moreover he is in the flower of youth when a man’s strength is greatest;
if I was of the same age as he is and in my present mind, either he or I
should soon bear away the prize of victory.”



On this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on shoulder. Aeneas
on the other side called to his comrades, looking towards Deiphobus,
Paris, and Agenor, who were leaders of the Trojans along with himself, and
the people followed them as sheep follow the ram when they go down to
drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of the shepherd is glad—even
so was the heart of Aeneas gladdened when he saw his people follow him.



Then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of Alcathous,
wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies rang
fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the fight, while
the two heroes Aeneas and Idomeneus, peers of Mars, outvied everyone in
their desire to hack at each other with sword and spear. Aeneas took aim
first, but Idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided the spear, so that it
sped from Aeneas’ strong hand in vain, and fell quivering in the ground.
Idomeneus meanwhile smote Oenomaus in the middle of his belly, and broke
the plate of his corslet, whereon his bowels came gushing out and he
clutched the earth in the palms of his hands as he fell sprawling in the
dust. Idomeneus drew his spear out of the body, but could not strip him of
the rest of his armour for the rain of darts that were showered upon him:
moreover his strength was now beginning to fail him so that he could no
longer charge, and could neither spring forward to recover his own weapon
nor swerve aside to avoid one that was aimed at him; therefore, though he
still defended himself in hand-to-hand fight, his heavy feet could not
bear him swiftly out of the battle. Deiphobus aimed a spear at him as he
was retreating slowly from the field, for his bitterness against him was
as fierce as ever, but again he missed him, and hit Ascalaphus, the son of
Mars; the spear went through his shoulder, and he clutched the earth in
the palms of his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust.



Grim Mars of awful voice did not yet know that his son had fallen, for he
was sitting on the summits of Olympus under the golden clouds, by command
of Jove, where the other gods were also sitting, forbidden to take part in
the battle. Meanwhile men fought furiously about the body. Deiphobus tore
the helmet from off his head, but Meriones sprang upon him, and struck him
on the arm with a spear so that the visored helmet fell from his hand and
came ringing down upon the ground. Thereon Meriones sprang upon him like a
vulture, drew the spear from his shoulder, and fell back under cover of
his men. Then Polites, own brother of Deiphobus passed his arms around his
waist, and bore him away from the battle till he got to his horses that
were standing in the rear of the fight with the chariot and their driver.
These took him towards the city groaning and in great pain, with the blood
flowing from his arm.



The others still fought on, and the battle-cry rose to heaven without
ceasing. Aeneas sprang on Aphareus son of Caletor, and struck him with a
spear in his throat which was turned towards him; his head fell on one
side, his helmet and shield came down along with him, and death, life’s
foe, was shed around him. Antilochus spied his chance, flew forward
towards Thoon, and wounded him as he was turning round. He laid open the
vein that runs all the way up the back to the neck; he cut this vein clean
away throughout its whole course, and Thoon fell in the dust face upwards,
stretching out his hands imploringly towards his comrades. Antilochus
sprang upon him and stripped the armour from his shoulders, glaring round
him fearfully as he did so. The Trojans came about him on every side and
struck his broad and gleaming shield, but could not wound his body, for
Neptune stood guard over the son of Nestor, though the darts fell thickly
round him. He was never clear of the foe, but was always in the thick of
the fight; his spear was never idle; he poised and aimed it in every
direction, so eager was he to hit someone from a distance or to fight him
hand to hand.



As he was thus aiming among the crowd, he was seen by Adamas, son of
Asius, who rushed towards him and struck him with a spear in the middle of
his shield, but Neptune made its point without effect, for he grudged him
the life of Antilochus. One half, therefore, of the spear stuck fast like
a charred stake in Antilochus’s shield, while the other lay on the ground.
Adamas then sought shelter under cover of his men, but Meriones followed
after and hit him with a spear midway between the private parts and the
navel, where a wound is particularly painful to wretched mortals. There
did Meriones transfix him, and he writhed convulsively about the spear as
some bull whom mountain herdsmen have bound with ropes of withes and are
taking away perforce. Even so did he move convulsively for a while, but
not for very long, till Meriones came up and drew the spear out of his
body, and his eyes were veiled in darkness.



Helenus then struck Deipyrus with a great Thracian sword, hitting him on
the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his head; the
helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting on the
Achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but the eyes of
Deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death.



On this Menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards Helenus,
brandishing his spear; but Helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked one
another at one and the same moment, the one with his spear, and the other
with his bow and arrow. The son of Priam hit the breastplate of Menelaus’s
corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. As black beans or pulse come
pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad winnowing-shovel,
blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel—even so did the arrow
glance off and recoil from the shield of Menelaus, who in his turn wounded
the hand with which Helenus carried his bow; the spear went right through
his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that to his life he retreated
under cover of his men, with his hand dragging by his side—for the
spear weighed it down till Agenor drew it out and bound the hand carefully
up in a woollen sling which his esquire had with him.



Pisander then made straight at Menelaus—his evil destiny luring him
on to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, O Menelaus. When the
two were hard by one another the spear of the son of Atreus turned aside
and he missed his aim; Pisander then struck the shield of brave Menelaus
but could not pierce it, for the shield stayed the spear and broke the
shaft; nevertheless he was glad and made sure of victory; forthwith,
however, the son of Atreus drew his sword and sprang upon him. Pisander
then seized the bronze battle-axe, with its long and polished handle of
olive wood that hung by his side under his shield, and the two made at one
another. Pisander struck the peak of Menelaus’s crested helmet just under
the crest itself, and Menelaus hit Pisander as he was coming towards him,
on the forehead, just at the rise of his nose; the bones cracked and his
two gore-bedrabbled eyes fell by his feet in the dust. He fell backwards
to the ground, and Menelaus set his heel upon him, stripped him of his
armour, and vaunted over him saying, “Even thus shall you Trojans leave
the ships of the Achaeans, proud and insatiate of battle though you be,
nor shall you lack any of the disgrace and shame which you have heaped
upon myself. Cowardly she-wolves that you are, you feared not the anger of
dread Jove, avenger of violated hospitality, who will one day destroy your
city; you stole my wedded wife and wickedly carried off much treasure when
you were her guest, and now you would fling fire upon our ships, and kill
our heroes. A day will come when, rage as you may, you shall be stayed. O
father Jove, you, who they say art above all, both gods and men, in
wisdom, and from whom all things that befall us do proceed, how can you
thus favour the Trojans—men so proud and overweening, that they are
never tired of fighting? All things pall after a while—sleep, love,
sweet song, and stately dance—still these are things of which a man
would surely have his fill rather than of battle, whereas it is of battle
that the Trojans are insatiate.”



So saying Menelaus stripped the blood-stained armour from the body of
Pisander, and handed it over to his men; then he again ranged himself
among those who were in the front of the fight.



Harpalion son of King Pylaemenes then sprang upon him; he had come to
fight at Troy along with his father, but he did not go home again. He
struck the middle of Menelaus’s shield with his spear but could not pierce
it, and to save his life drew back under cover of his men, looking round
him on every side lest he should be wounded. But Meriones aimed a
bronze-tipped arrow at him as he was leaving the field, and hit him on the
right buttock; the arrow pierced the bone through and through, and
penetrated the bladder, so he sat down where he was and breathed his last
in the arms of his comrades, stretched like a worm upon the ground and
watering the earth with the blood that flowed from his wound. The brave
Paphlagonians tended him with all due care; they raised him into his
chariot, and bore him sadly off to the city of Troy; his father went also
with him weeping bitterly, but there was no ransom that could bring his
dead son to life again.



Paris was deeply grieved by the death of Harpalion, who was his host when
he went among the Paphlagonians; he aimed an arrow, therefore, in order to
avenge him. Now there was a certain man named Euchenor, son of Polyidus
the prophet, a brave man and wealthy, whose home was in Corinth. This
Euchenor had set sail for Troy well knowing that it would be the death of
him, for his good old father Polyidus had often told him that he must
either stay at home and die of a terrible disease, or go with the Achaeans
and perish at the hands of the Trojans; he chose, therefore, to avoid
incurring the heavy fine the Achaeans would have laid upon him, and at the
same time to escape the pain and suffering of disease. Paris now smote him
on the jaw under his ear, whereon the life went out of him and he was
enshrouded in the darkness of death.



Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. But Hector had not yet
heard, and did not know that the Argives were making havoc of his men on
the left wing of the battle, where the Achaeans ere long would have
triumphed over them, so vigorously did Neptune cheer them on and help
them. He therefore held on at the point where he had first forced his way
through the gates and the wall, after breaking through the serried ranks
of Danaan warriors. It was here that the ships of Ajax and Protesilaus
were drawn up by the sea-shore; here the wall was at its lowest, and the
fight both of man and horse raged most fiercely. The Boeotians and the
Ionians with their long tunics, the Locrians, the men of Phthia, and the
famous force of the Epeans could hardly stay Hector as he rushed on
towards the ships, nor could they drive him from them, for he was as a
wall of fire. The chosen men of the Athenians were in the van, led by
Menestheus son of Peteos, with whom were also Pheidas, Stichius, and
stalwart Bias; Meges son of Phyleus, Amphion, and Dracius commanded the
Epeans, while Medon and staunch Podarces led the men of Phthia. Of these,
Medon was bastard son to Oileus and brother of Ajax, but he lived in
Phylace away from his own country, for he had killed the brother of his
stepmother Eriopis, the wife of Oileus; the other, Podarces, was the son
of Iphiclus, son of Phylacus. These two stood in the van of the Phthians,
and defended the ships along with the Boeotians.



Ajax son of Oileus, never for a moment left the side of Ajax, son of
Telamon, but as two swart oxen both strain their utmost at the plough
which they are drawing in a fallow field, and the sweat steams upwards
from about the roots of their horns—nothing but the yoke divides
them as they break up the ground till they reach the end of the field—even
so did the two Ajaxes stand shoulder to shoulder by one another. Many and
brave comrades followed the son of Telamon, to relieve him of his shield
when he was overcome with sweat and toil, but the Locrians did not follow
so close after the son of Oileus, for they could not hold their own in a
hand-to-hand fight. They had no bronze helmets with plumes of horse-hair,
neither had they shields nor ashen spears, but they had come to Troy armed
with bows, and with slings of twisted wool from which they showered their
missiles to break the ranks of the Trojans. The others, therefore, with
their heavy armour bore the brunt of the fight with the Trojans and with
Hector, while the Locrians shot from behind, under their cover; and thus
the Trojans began to lose heart, for the arrows threw them into confusion.



The Trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the ships and
tents back to windy Ilius, had not Polydamas presently said to Hector,
“Hector, there is no persuading you to take advice. Because heaven has so
richly endowed you with the arts of war, you think that you must therefore
excel others in counsel; but you cannot thus claim preeminence in all
things. Heaven has made one man an excellent soldier; of another it has
made a dancer or a singer and player on the lyre; while yet in another
Jove has implanted a wise understanding of which men reap fruit to the
saving of many, and he himself knows more about it than any one; therefore
I will say what I think will be best. The fight has hemmed you in as with
a circle of fire, and even now that the Trojans are within the wall some
of them stand aloof in full armour, while others are fighting scattered
and outnumbered near the ships. Draw back, therefore, and call your
chieftains round you, that we may advise together whether to fall now upon
the ships in the hope that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to beat a
retreat while we can yet safely do so. I greatly fear that the Achaeans
will pay us their debt of yesterday in full, for there is one abiding at
their ships who is never weary of battle, and who will not hold aloof much
longer.”



Thus spoke Polydamas, and his words pleased Hector well. He sprang in full
armour from his chariot and said, “Polydamas, gather the chieftains here;
I will go yonder into the fight, but will return at once when I have given
them their orders.”



He then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud cry
flew through the ranks of the Trojans and their allies. When they heard
his voice they all hastened to gather round Polydamas, the excellent son
of Panthous, but Hector kept on among the foremost, looking everywhere to
find Deiphobus and prince Helenus, Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of
Hyrtacus; living, indeed, and scatheless he could no longer find them, for
the two last were lying by the sterns of the Achaean ships, slain by the
Argives, while the others had been also stricken and wounded by them; but
upon the left wing of the dread battle he found Alexandrus, husband of
lovely Helen, cheering his men and urging them on to fight. He went up to
him and upbraided him. “Paris,” said he, “evil-hearted Paris, fair to see
but woman-mad and false of tongue, where are Deiphobus and King Helenus?
Where are Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of Hyrtacus? Where too is
Othryoneus? Ilius is undone and will now surely fall!”



Alexandrus answered, “Hector, why find fault when there is no one to find
fault with? I should hold aloof from battle on any day rather than this,
for my mother bore me with nothing of the coward about me. From the moment
when you set our men fighting about the ships we have been staying here
and doing battle with the Danaans. Our comrades about whom you ask me are
dead; Deiphobus and King Helenus alone have left the field, wounded both
of them in the hand, but the son of Saturn saved them alive. Now,
therefore, lead on where you would have us go, and we will follow with
right goodwill; you shall not find us fail you in so far as our strength
holds out, but no man can do more than in him lies, no matter how willing
he may be.”



With these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went towards the
part of the battle where the fight was thickest, about Cebriones, brave
Polydamas, Phalces, Orthaeus, godlike Polyphetes, Palmys, Ascanius, and
Morys son of Hippotion, who had come from fertile Ascania on the preceding
day to relieve other troops. Then Jove urged them on to fight. They flew
forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike earth in the van of
a thunderstorm—they buffet the salt sea into an uproar; many and
mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one after the other upon
the shore with their arching heads all crested with foam—even so did
rank behind rank of Trojans arrayed in gleaming armour follow their
leaders onward. The way was led by Hector son of Priam, peer of murderous
Mars, with his round shield before him—his shield of ox-hides
covered with plates of bronze—and his gleaming helmet upon his
temples. He kept stepping forward under cover of his shield in every
direction, making trial of the ranks to see if they would give way before
him, but he could not daunt the courage of the Achaeans. Ajax was the
first to stride out and challenge him. “Sir,” he cried, “draw near; why do
you think thus vainly to dismay the Argives? We Achaeans are excellent
soldiers, but the scourge of Jove has fallen heavily upon us. Your heart,
forsooth, is set on destroying our ships, but we too have hands that can
keep you at bay, and your own fair town shall be sooner taken and sacked
by ourselves. The time is near when you shall pray Jove and all the gods
in your flight, that your steeds may be swifter than hawks as they raise
the dust on the plain and bear you back to your city.”



As he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and the host
of the Achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the omen. But Hector
answered, “Ajax, braggart and false of tongue, would that I were as sure
of being son for evermore to aegis-bearing Jove, with Queen Juno for my
mother, and of being held in like honour with Minerva and Apollo, as I am
that this day is big with the destruction of the Achaeans; and you shall
fall among them if you dare abide my spear; it shall rend your fair body
and bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey with your fat and your
flesh, as you fall by the ships of the Achaeans.”



With these words he led the way and the others followed after with a cry
that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. The Argives on
their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their prowess, but
stood firm against the onslaught of the Trojan chieftains, and the cry
from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness of Jove’s
presence.

=== ILIAD BOOK 14 ===

Agamemnon proposes that the Achaeans should sail home, and is rebuked by
Ulysses—Juno beguiles Jupiter—Hector is wounded.



Nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape
him, and he said to the son of Aesculapius, “What, noble Machaon, is the
meaning of all this? The shouts of men fighting by our ships grow stronger
and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine, while fair
Hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from off you. I
will go at once to the look-out station and see what it is all about.”



As he spoke he took up the shield of his son Thrasymedes that was lying in
his tent, all gleaming with bronze, for Thrasymedes had taken his father’s
shield; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and as soon as he
was outside saw the disastrous rout of the Achaeans who, now that their
wall was overthrown, were flying pell-mell before the Trojans. As when
there is a heavy swell upon the sea, but the waves are dumb—they
keep their eyes on the watch for the quarter whence the fierce winds may
spring upon them, but they stay where they are and set neither this way
nor that, till some particular wind sweeps down from heaven to determine
them—even so did the old man ponder whether to make for the crowd of
Danaans, or go in search of Agamemnon. In the end he deemed it best to go
to the son of Atreus; but meanwhile the hosts were fighting and killing
one another, and the hard bronze rattled on their bodies, as they thrust
at one another with their swords and spears.



The wounded kings, the son of Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon son of
Atreus, fell in with Nestor as they were coming up from their ships—for
theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting was going on, being
on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been beached first, while the
wall had been built behind the hindermost. The stretch of the shore, wide
though it was, did not afford room for all the ships, and the host was
cramped for space, therefore they had placed the ships in rows one behind
the other, and had filled the whole opening of the bay between the two
points that formed it. The kings, leaning on their spears, were coming out
to survey the fight, being in great anxiety, and when old Nestor met them
they were filled with dismay. Then King Agamemnon said to him, “Nestor son
of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, why have you left the battle to
come hither? I fear that what dread Hector said will come true, when he
vaunted among the Trojans saying that he would not return to Ilius till he
had fired our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all
coming true. Alas! others of the Achaeans, like Achilles, are in such
anger with me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships.”



Then Nestor knight of Gerene, answered, “It is indeed as you say; it is
all coming true at this moment, and even Jove who thunders from on high
cannot prevent it. Fallen is the wall on which we relied as an impregnable
bulwark both for us and our fleet. The Trojans are fighting stubbornly and
without ceasing at the ships; look where you may you cannot see from what
quarter the rout of the Achaeans is coming; they are being killed in a
confused mass and the battle-cry ascends to heaven; let us think, if
counsel can be of any use, what we had better do; but I do not advise our
going into battle ourselves, for a man cannot fight when he is wounded.”



And King Agamemnon answered, “Nestor, if the Trojans are indeed fighting
at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the trench has served
us—over which the Danaans toiled so hard, and which they deemed
would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet—I see it
must be the will of Jove that the Achaeans should perish ingloriously
here, far from Argos. I knew when Jove was willing to defend us, and I
know now that he is raising the Trojans to like honour with the gods,
while us, on the other hand, he has bound hand and foot. Now, therefore,
let us all do as I say; let us bring down the ships that are on the beach
and draw them into the water; let us make them fast to their
mooring-stones a little way out, against the fall of night—if even
by night the Trojans will desist from fighting; we may then draw down the
rest of the fleet. There is nothing wrong in flying ruin even by night. It
is better for a man that he should fly and be saved than be caught and
killed.”



Ulysses looked fiercely at him and said, “Son of Atreus, what are you
talking about? Wretch, you should have commanded some other and baser
army, and not been ruler over us to whom Jove has allotted a life of hard
fighting from youth to old age, till we every one of us perish. Is it thus
that you would quit the city of Troy, to win which we have suffered so
much hardship? Hold your peace, lest some other of the Achaeans hear you
say what no man who knows how to give good counsel, no king over so great
a host as that of the Argives should ever have let fall from his lips. I
despise your judgement utterly for what you have been saying. Would you,
then, have us draw down our ships into the water while the battle is
raging, and thus play further into the hands of the conquering Trojans? It
would be ruin; the Achaeans will not go on fighting when they see the
ships being drawn into the water, but will cease attacking and keep
turning their eyes towards them; your counsel, therefore, sir captain,
would be our destruction.”



Agamemnon answered, “Ulysses, your rebuke has stung me to the heart. I am
not, however, ordering the Achaeans to draw their ships into the sea
whether they will or no. Someone, it may be, old or young, can offer us
better counsel which I shall rejoice to hear.”



Then said Diomed, “Such an one is at hand; he is not far to seek, if you
will listen to me and not resent my speaking though I am younger than any
of you. I am by lineage son to a noble sire, Tydeus, who lies buried at
Thebes. For Portheus had three noble sons, two of whom, Agrius and Melas,
abode in Pleuron and rocky Calydon. The third was the knight Oeneus, my
father’s father, and he was the most valiant of them all. Oeneus remained
in his own country, but my father (as Jove and the other gods ordained it)
migrated to Argos. He married into the family of Adrastus, and his house
was one of great abundance, for he had large estates of rich corn-growing
land, with much orchard ground as well, and he had many sheep; moreover he
excelled all the Argives in the use of the spear. You must yourselves have
heard whether these things are true or no; therefore when I say well
despise not my words as though I were a coward or of ignoble birth. I say,
then, let us go to the fight as we needs must, wounded though we be. When
there, we may keep out of the battle and beyond the range of the spears
lest we get fresh wounds in addition to what we have already, but we can
spur on others, who have been indulging their spleen and holding aloof
from battle hitherto.”



Thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set out, King
Agamemnon leading the way.



Meanwhile Neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them in the
semblance of an old man. He took Agamemnon’s right hand in his own and
said, “Son of Atreus, I take it Achilles is glad now that he sees the
Achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly without remorse—may he
come to a bad end and heaven confound him. As for yourself, the blessed
gods are not yet so bitterly angry with you but that the princes and
counsellors of the Trojans shall again raise the dust upon the plain, and
you shall see them flying from the ships and tents towards their city.”



With this he raised a mighty cry of battle, and sped forward to the plain.
The voice that came from his deep chest was as that of nine or ten
thousand men when they are shouting in the thick of a fight, and it put
fresh courage into the hearts of the Achaeans to wage war and do battle
without ceasing.



Juno of the golden throne looked down as she stood upon a peak of Olympus
and her heart was gladdened at the sight of him who was at once her
brother and her brother-in-law, hurrying hither and thither amid the
fighting. Then she turned her eyes to Jove as he sat on the topmost crests
of many-fountained Ida, and loathed him. She set herself to think how she
might hoodwink him, and in the end she deemed that it would be best for
her to go to Ida and array herself in rich attire, in the hope that Jove
might become enamoured of her, and wish to embrace her. While he was thus
engaged a sweet and careless sleep might be made to steal over his eyes
and senses.



She went, therefore, to the room which her son Vulcan had made her, and
the doors of which he had cunningly fastened by means of a secret key so
that no other god could open them. Here she entered and closed the doors
behind her. She cleansed all the dirt from her fair body with ambrosia,
then she anointed herself with olive oil, ambrosial, very soft, and
scented specially for herself—if it were so much as shaken in the
bronze-floored house of Jove, the scent pervaded the universe of heaven
and earth. With this she anointed her delicate skin, and then she plaited
the fair ambrosial locks that flowed in a stream of golden tresses from
her immortal head. She put on the wondrous robe which Minerva had worked
for her with consummate art, and had embroidered with manifold devices;
she fastened it about her bosom with golden clasps, and she girded herself
with a girdle that had a hundred tassels: then she fastened her earrings,
three brilliant pendants that glistened most beautifully, through the
pierced lobes of her ears, and threw a lovely new veil over her head. She
bound her sandals on to her feet, and when she had arrayed herself
perfectly to her satisfaction, she left her room and called Venus to come
aside and speak to her. “My dear child,” said she, “will you do what I am
going to ask of you, or will you refuse me because you are angry at my
being on the Danaan side, while you are on the Trojan?”



Jove’s daughter Venus answered, “Juno, august queen of goddesses, daughter
of mighty Saturn, say what you want, and I will do it for you at once, if
I can, and if it can be done at all.”



Then Juno told her a lying tale and said, “I want you to endow me with
some of those fascinating charms, the spells of which bring all things
mortal and immortal to your feet. I am going to the world’s end to visit
Oceanus (from whom all we gods proceed) and mother Tethys: they received
me in their house, took care of me, and brought me up, having taken me
over from Rhaea when Jove imprisoned great Saturn in the depths that are
under earth and sea. I must go and see them that I may make peace between
them; they have been quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not
slept with one another this long while; if I can bring them round and
restore them to one another’s embraces, they will be grateful to me and
love me for ever afterwards.”



Thereon laughter-loving Venus said, “I cannot and must not refuse you, for
you sleep in the arms of Jove who is our king.”



As she spoke she loosed from her bosom the curiously embroidered girdle
into which all her charms had been wrought—love, desire, and that
sweet flattery which steals the judgement even of the most prudent. She
gave the girdle to Juno and said, “Take this girdle wherein all my charms
reside and lay it in your bosom. If you will wear it I promise you that
your errand, be it what it may, will not be bootless.”



When she heard this Juno smiled, and still smiling she laid the girdle in
her bosom.



Venus now went back into the house of Jove, while Juno darted down from
the summits of Olympus. She passed over Pieria and fair Emathia, and went
on and on till she came to the snowy ranges of the Thracian horsemen, over
whose topmost crests she sped without ever setting foot to ground. When
she came to Athos she went on over the waves of the sea till she reached
Lemnos, the city of noble Thoas. There she met Sleep, own brother to
Death, and caught him by the hand, saying, “Sleep, you who lord it alike
over mortals and immortals, if you ever did me a service in times past, do
one for me now, and I shall be grateful to you ever after. Close Jove’s
keen eyes for me in slumber while I hold him clasped in my embrace, and I
will give you a beautiful golden seat, that can never fall to pieces; my
clubfooted son Vulcan shall make it for you, and he shall give it a
footstool for you to rest your fair feet upon when you are at table.”



Then Sleep answered, “Juno, great queen of goddesses, daughter of mighty
Saturn, I would lull any other of the gods to sleep without compunction,
not even excepting the waters of Oceanus from whom all of them proceed,
but I dare not go near Jove, nor send him to sleep unless he bids me. I
have had one lesson already through doing what you asked me, on the day
when Jove’s mighty son Hercules set sail from Ilius after having sacked
the city of the Trojans. At your bidding I suffused my sweet self over the
mind of aegis-bearing Jove, and laid him to rest; meanwhile you hatched a
plot against Hercules, and set the blasts of the angry winds beating upon
the sea, till you took him to the goodly city of Cos, away from all his
friends. Jove was furious when he awoke, and began hurling the gods about
all over the house; he was looking more particularly for myself, and would
have flung me down through space into the sea where I should never have
been heard of any more, had not Night who cows both men and gods protected
me. I fled to her and Jove left off looking for me in spite of his being
so angry, for he did not dare do anything to displease Night. And now you
are again asking me to do something on which I cannot venture.”



And Juno said, “Sleep, why do you take such notions as those into your
head? Do you think Jove will be as anxious to help the Trojans, as he was
about his own son? Come, I will marry you to one of the youngest of the
Graces, and she shall be your own—Pasithea, whom you have always
wanted to marry.”



Sleep was pleased when he heard this, and answered, “Then swear it to me
by the dread waters of the river Styx; lay one hand on the bounteous
earth, and the other on the sheen of the sea, so that all the gods who
dwell down below with Saturn may be our witnesses, and see that you really
do give me one of the youngest of the Graces—Pasithea, whom I have
always wanted to marry.”



Juno did as he had said. She swore, and invoked all the gods of the nether
world, who are called Titans, to witness. When she had completed her oath,
the two enshrouded themselves in a thick mist and sped lightly forward,
leaving Lemnos and Imbrus behind them. Presently they reached
many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Lectum where they left the
sea to go on by land, and the tops of the trees of the forest soughed
under the going of their feet. Here Sleep halted, and ere Jove caught
sight of him he climbed a lofty pine-tree—the tallest that reared
its head towards heaven on all Ida. He hid himself behind the branches and
sat there in the semblance of the sweet-singing bird that haunts the
mountains and is called Chalcis by the gods, but men call it Cymindis.
Juno then went to Gargarus, the topmost peak of Ida, and Jove, driver of
the clouds, set eyes upon her. As soon as he did so he became inflamed
with the same passionate desire for her that he had felt when they had
first enjoyed each other’s embraces, and slept with one another without
their dear parents knowing anything about it. He went up to her and said,
“What do you want that you have come hither from Olympus—and that
too with neither chariot nor horses to convey you?”



Then Juno told him a lying tale and said, “I am going to the world’s end,
to visit Oceanus, from whom all we gods proceed, and mother Tethys; they
received me into their house, took care of me, and brought me up. I must
go and see them that I may make peace between them: they have been
quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not slept with one another
this long time. The horses that will take me over land and sea are
stationed on the lowermost spurs of many-fountained Ida, and I have come
here from Olympus on purpose to consult you. I was afraid you might be
angry with me later on, if I went to the house of Oceanus without letting
you know.”



And Jove said, “Juno, you can choose some other time for paying your visit
to Oceanus—for the present let us devote ourselves to love and to
the enjoyment of one another. Never yet have I been so overpowered by
passion neither for goddess nor mortal woman as I am at this moment for
yourself—not even when I was in love with the wife of Ixion who bore
me Pirithous, peer of gods in counsel, nor yet with Danae the
daintily-ancled daughter of Acrisius, who bore me the famed hero Perseus.
Then there was the daughter of Phoenix, who bore me Minos and
Rhadamanthus: there was Semele, and Alcmena in Thebes by whom I begot my
lion-hearted son Hercules, while Semele became mother to Bacchus the
comforter of mankind. There was queen Ceres again, and lovely Leto, and
yourself—but with none of these was I ever so much enamoured as I
now am with you.”



Juno again answered him with a lying tale. “Most dread son of Saturn,” she
exclaimed, “what are you talking about? Would you have us enjoy one
another here on the top of Mount Ida, where everything can be seen? What
if one of the ever-living gods should see us sleeping together, and tell
the others? It would be such a scandal that when I had risen from your
embraces I could never show myself inside your house again; but if you are
so minded, there is a room which your son Vulcan has made me, and he has
given it good strong doors; if you would so have it, let us go thither and
lie down.”



And Jove answered, “Juno, you need not be afraid that either god or man
will see you, for I will enshroud both of us in such a dense golden cloud,
that the very sun for all his bright piercing beams shall not see through
it.”



With this the son of Saturn caught his wife in his embrace; whereon the
earth sprouted them a cushion of young grass, with dew-bespangled lotus,
crocus, and hyacinth, so soft and thick that it raised them well above the
ground. Here they laid themselves down and overhead they were covered by a
fair cloud of gold, from which there fell glittering dew-drops.



Thus, then, did the sire of all things repose peacefully on the crest of
Ida, overcome at once by sleep and love, and he held his spouse in his
arms. Meanwhile Sleep made off to the ships of the Achaeans, to tell
earth-encircling Neptune, lord of the earthquake. When he had found him he
said, “Now, Neptune, you can help the Danaans with a will, and give them
victory though it be only for a short time while Jove is still sleeping. I
have sent him into a sweet slumber, and Juno has beguiled him into going
to bed with her.”



Sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving
Neptune more eager than ever to help the Danaans. He darted forward among
the first ranks and shouted saying, “Argives, shall we let Hector son of
Priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself with
glory? This is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that Achilles is
still in dudgeon at his ship; we shall get on very well without him if we
keep each other in heart and stand by one another. Now, therefore, let us
all do as I say. Let us each take the best and largest shield we can lay
hold of, put on our helmets, and sally forth with our longest spears in
our hands; I will lead you on, and Hector son of Priam, rage as he may,
will not dare to hold out against us. If any good staunch soldier has only
a small shield, let him hand it over to a worse man, and take a larger one
for himself.”



Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The son of Tydeus,
Ulysses, and Agamemnon, wounded though they were, set the others in array,
and went about everywhere effecting the exchanges of armour; the most
valiant took the best armour, and gave the worse to the worse man. When
they had donned their bronze armour they marched on with Neptune at their
head. In his strong hand he grasped his terrible sword, keen of edge and
flashing like lightning; woe to him who comes across it in the day of
battle; all men quake for fear and keep away from it.



Hector on the other side set the Trojans in array. Thereon Neptune and
Hector waged fierce war on one another—Hector on the Trojan and
Neptune on the Argive side. Mighty was the uproar as the two forces met;
the sea came rolling in towards the ships and tents of the Achaeans, but
waves do not thunder on the shore more loudly when driven before the blast
of Boreas, nor do the flames of a forest fire roar more fiercely when it
is well alight upon the mountains, nor does the wind bellow with ruder
music as it tears on through the tops of when it is blowing its hardest,
than the terrible shout which the Trojans and Achaeans raised as they
sprang upon one another.



Hector first aimed his spear at Ajax, who was turned full towards him, nor
did he miss his aim. The spear struck him where two bands passed over his
chest—the band of his shield and that of his silver-studded sword—and
these protected his body. Hector was angry that his spear should have been
hurled in vain, and withdrew under cover of his men. As he was thus
retreating, Ajax son of Telamon, struck him with a stone, of which there
were many lying about under the men’s feet as they fought—brought
there to give support to the ships’ sides as they lay on the shore. Ajax
caught up one of them and struck Hector above the rim of his shield close
to his neck; the blow made him spin round like a top and reel in all
directions. As an oak falls headlong when uprooted by the lightning flash
of father Jove, and there is a terrible smell of brimstone—no man
can help being dismayed if he is standing near it, for a thunderbolt is a
very awful thing—even so did Hector fall to earth and bite the dust.
His spear fell from his hand, but his shield and helmet were made fast
about his body, and his bronze armour rang about him.



The sons of the Achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him, hoping
to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the Trojans, but none
of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered by the
princes Polydamas, Aeneas, Agenor, Sarpedon captain of the Lycians, and
noble Glaucus. Of the others, too, there was not one who was unmindful of
him, and they held their round shields over him to cover him. His comrades
then lifted him off the ground and bore him away from the battle to the
place where his horses stood waiting for him at the rear of the fight with
their driver and the chariot; these then took him towards the city
groaning and in great pain. When they reached the ford of the fair stream
of Xanthus, begotten of Immortal Jove, they took him from off his chariot
and laid him down on the ground; they poured water over him, and as they
did so he breathed again and opened his eyes. Then kneeling on his knees
he vomited blood, but soon fell back on to the ground, and his eyes were
again closed in darkness for he was still stunned by the blow.



When the Argives saw Hector leaving the field, they took heart and set
upon the Trojans yet more furiously. Ajax fleet son of Oileus began by
springing on Satnius son of Enops, and wounding him with his spear: a fair
naiad nymph had borne him to Enops as he was herding cattle by the banks
of the river Satnioeis. The son of Oileus came up to him and struck him in
the flank so that he fell, and a fierce fight between Trojans and Danaans
raged round his body. Polydamas son of Panthous drew near to avenge him,
and wounded Prothoenor son of Areilycus on the right shoulder; the
terrible spear went right through his shoulder, and he clutched the earth
as he fell in the dust. Polydamas vaunted loudly over him saying, “Again I
take it that the spear has not sped in vain from the strong hand of the
son of Panthous; an Argive has caught it in his body, and it will serve
him for a staff as he goes down into the house of Hades.”



The Argives were maddened by this boasting. Ajax son of Telamon was more
angry than any, for the man had fallen close beside him; so he aimed at
Polydamas as he was retreating, but Polydamas saved himself by swerving
aside and the spear struck Archelochus son of Antenor, for heaven
counselled his destruction; it struck him where the head springs from the
neck at the top joint of the spine, and severed both the tendons at the
back of the head. His head, mouth, and nostrils reached the ground long
before his legs and knees could do so, and Ajax shouted to Polydamas
saying, “Think, Polydamas, and tell me truly whether this man is not as
well worth killing as Prothoenor was: he seems rich, and of rich family, a
brother, it may be, or son of the knight Antenor, for he is very like
him.”



But he knew well who it was, and the Trojans were greatly angered. Acamas
then bestrode his brother’s body and wounded Promachus the Boeotian with
his spear, for he was trying to drag his brother’s body away. Acamas
vaunted loudly over him saying, “Argive archers, braggarts that you are,
toil and suffering shall not be for us only, but some of you too shall
fall here as well as ourselves. See how Promachus now sleeps, vanquished
by my spear; payment for my brother’s blood has not been long delayed; a
man, therefore, may well be thankful if he leaves a kinsman in his house
behind him to avenge his fall.”



His taunts infuriated the Argives, and Peneleos was more enraged than any
of them. He sprang towards Acamas, but Acamas did not stand his ground,
and he killed Ilioneus son of the rich flock-master Phorbas, whom Mercury
had favoured and endowed with greater wealth than any other of the
Trojans. Ilioneus was his only son, and Peneleos now wounded him in the
eye under his eyebrows, tearing the eye-ball from its socket: the spear
went right through the eye into the nape of the neck, and he fell,
stretching out both hands before him. Peneleos then drew his sword and
smote him on the neck, so that both head and helmet came tumbling down to
the ground with the spear still sticking in the eye; he then held up the
head, as though it had been a poppy-head, and showed it to the Trojans,
vaunting over them as he did so. “Trojans,” he cried, “bid the father and
mother of noble Ilioneus make moan for him in their house, for the wife
also of Promachus son of Alegenor will never be gladdened by the coming of
her dear husband—when we Argives return with our ships from Troy.”



As he spoke fear fell upon them, and every man looked round about to see
whither he might fly for safety.



Tell me now, O Muses that dwell on Olympus, who was the first of the
Argives to bear away blood-stained spoils after Neptune lord of the
earthquake had turned the fortune of war. Ajax son of Telamon was first to
wound Hyrtius son of Gyrtius, captain of the staunch Mysians. Antilochus
killed Phalces and Mermerus, while Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion,
Teucer also killed Prothoon and Periphetes. The son of Atreus then wounded
Hyperenor shepherd of his people, in the flank, and the bronze point made
his entrails gush out as it tore in among them; on this his life came
hurrying out of him at the place where he had been wounded, and his eyes
were closed in darkness. Ajax son of Oileus killed more than any other,
for there was no man so fleet as he to pursue flying foes when Jove had
spread panic among them.

=== ILIAD BOOK 15 ===

Jove awakes, tells Apollo to heal Hector, and the Trojans again become
victorious.



But when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set stakes,
and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the Trojans made a halt
on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. Jove now woke on
the crests of Ida, where he was lying with golden-throned Juno by his
side, and starting to his feet he saw the Trojans and Achaeans, the one
thrown into confusion, and the others driving them pell-mell before them
with King Neptune in their midst. He saw Hector lying on the ground with
his comrades gathered round him, gasping for breath, wandering in mind and
vomiting blood, for it was not the feeblest of the Achaeans who struck
him.



The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on Juno. “I
see, Juno,” said he, “you mischief-making trickster, that your cunning has
stayed Hector from fighting and has caused the rout of his host. I am in
half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will be the first to reap the
fruits of your scurvy knavery. Do you not remember how once upon a time I
had you hanged? I fastened two anvils on to your feet, and bound your
hands in a chain of gold which none might break, and you hung in mid-air
among the clouds. All the gods in Olympus were in a fury, but they could
not reach you to set you free; when I caught any one of them I gripped him
and hurled him from the heavenly threshold till he came fainting down to
earth; yet even this did not relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety
which I felt about noble Hercules whom you and Boreas had spitefully
conveyed beyond the seas to Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I
rescued him, and notwithstanding all his mighty labours I brought him back
again to Argos. I would remind you of this that you may learn to leave off
being so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely to gain by the
embraces out of which you have come here to trick me.”



Juno trembled as he spoke, and said, “May heaven above and earth below be
my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—and this is the most
solemn oath that a blessed god can take—nay, I swear also by your
own almighty head and by our bridal bed—things over which I could
never possibly perjure myself—that Neptune is not punishing Hector
and the Trojans and helping the Achaeans through any doing of mine; it is
all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the Achaeans hard
pressed at their ships: if I were advising him, I should tell him to do as
you bid him.”



The sire of gods and men smiled and answered, “If you, Juno, were always
to support me when we sit in council of the gods, Neptune, like it or no,
would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. If, then, you are
speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the rank and file of
the gods, and tell Iris and Apollo lord of the bow, that I want them—Iris,
that she may go to the Achaean host and tell Neptune to leave off fighting
and go home, and Apollo, that he may send Hector again into battle and
give him fresh strength; he will thus forget his present sufferings, and
drive the Achaeans back in confusion till they fall among the ships of
Achilles son of Peleus. Achilles will then send his comrade Patroclus into
battle, and Hector will kill him in front of Ilius after he has slain many
warriors, and among them my own noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill
Hector to avenge Patroclus, and from that time I will bring it about that
the Achaeans shall persistently drive the Trojans back till they fulfil
the counsels of Minerva and take Ilius. But I will not stay my anger, nor
permit any god to help the Danaans till I have accomplished the desire of
the son of Peleus, according to the promise I made by bowing my head on
the day when Thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour.”



Juno heeded his words and went from the heights of Ida to great Olympus.
Swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast continents,
and he says to himself, “Now I will be here, or there,” and he would have
all manner of things—even so swiftly did Juno wing her way till she
came to high Olympus and went in among the gods who were gathered in the
house of Jove. When they saw her they all of them came up to her, and held
out their cups to her by way of greeting. She let the others be, but took
the cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was first to come running up to
her. “Juno,” said she, “why are you here? And you seem troubled—has
your husband the son of Saturn been frightening you?”



And Juno answered, “Themis, do not ask me about it. You know what a proud
and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods to table, where you
and all the immortals can hear the wicked designs which he has avowed.
Many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by them, however
peaceably he may be feasting now.”



On this Juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the house of
Jove. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed with care, and
she spoke up in a rage. “Fools that we are,” she cried, “to be thus madly
angry with Jove; we keep on wanting to go up to him and stay him by force
or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for nobody, for he knows
that he is much stronger than any other of the immortals. Make the best,
therefore, of whatever ills he may choose to send each one of you; Mars, I
take it, has had a taste of them already, for his son Ascalaphus has
fallen in battle—the man whom of all others he loved most dearly and
whose father he owns himself to be.”



When he heard this Mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat of his
hands, and said in anger, “Do not blame me, you gods that dwell in heaven,
if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the death of my son, even
though it end in my being struck by Jove’s lightning and lying in blood
and dust among the corpses.”



As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses Panic and Rout, while he put
on his armour. On this, Jove would have been roused to still more fierce
and implacable enmity against the other immortals, had not Minerva,
alarmed for the safety of the gods, sprung from her seat and hurried
outside. She tore the helmet from his head and the shield from his
shoulders, and she took the bronze spear from his strong hand and set it
on one side; then she said to Mars, “Madman, you are undone; you have ears
that hear not, or you have lost all judgement and understanding; have you
not heard what Juno has said on coming straight from the presence of
Olympian Jove? Do you wish to go through all kinds of suffering before you
are brought back sick and sorry to Olympus, after having caused infinite
mischief to all us others? Jove would instantly leave the Trojans and
Achaeans to themselves; he would come to Olympus to punish us, and would
grip us up one after another, guilty or not guilty. Therefore lay aside
your anger for the death of your son; better men than he have either been
killed already or will fall hereafter, and one cannot protect every one’s
whole family.”



With these words she took Mars back to his seat. Meanwhile Juno called
Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the gods. “Jove,” she said to
them, “desires you to go to him at once on Mt. Ida; when you have seen him
you are to do as he may then bid you.”



Thereon Juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while Iris and Apollo
made all haste on their way. When they reached many-fountained Ida, mother
of wild beasts, they found Jove seated on topmost Gargarus with a fragrant
cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. They stood before his
presence, and he was pleased with them for having been so quick in obeying
the orders his wife had given them.



He spoke to Iris first. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, tell King Neptune what
I now bid you—and tell him true. Bid him leave off fighting, and
either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea. If he takes
no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether he is strong enough
to hold his own against me if I attack him. I am older and much stronger
than he is; yet he is not afraid to set himself up as on a level with
myself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe.”



Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or snow-flakes
that fly from out the clouds before the blast of Boreas, even so did she
wing her way till she came close up to the great shaker of the earth. Then
she said, “I have come, O dark-haired king that holds the world in his
embrace, to bring you a message from Jove. He bids you leave off fighting,
and either join the company of the gods or go down into the sea; if,
however, you take no heed and disobey him, he says he will come down here
and fight you. He would have you keep out of his reach, for he is older
and much stronger than you are, and yet you are not afraid to set yourself
up as on a level with himself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe.”



Neptune was very angry and said, “Great heavens! strong as Jove may be, he
has said more than he can do if he has threatened violence against me, who
am of like honour with himself. We were three brothers whom Rhea bore to
Saturn—Jove, myself, and Hades who rules the world below. Heaven and
earth were divided into three parts, and each of us was to have an equal
share. When we cast lots, it fell to me to have my dwelling in the sea for
evermore; Hades took the darkness of the realms under the earth, while air
and sky and clouds were the portion that fell to Jove; but earth and great
Olympus are the common property of all. Therefore I will not walk as Jove
would have me. For all his strength, let him keep to his own third share
and be contented without threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were
nobody. Let him keep his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who
must perforce obey him.”



Iris fleet as the wind then answered, “Am I really, Neptune, to take this
daring and unyielding message to Jove, or will you reconsider your answer?
Sensible people are open to argument, and you know that the Erinyes always
range themselves on the side of the older person.”



Neptune answered, “Goddess Iris, your words have been spoken in season. It
is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. Nevertheless it cuts me
to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily another who is his
own peer, and of like empire with himself. Now, however, I will give way
in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you, and I mean what I
say—if contrary to the desire of myself, Minerva driver of the
spoil, Juno, Mercury, and King Vulcan, Jove spares steep Ilius, and will
not let the Achaeans have the great triumph of sacking it, let him
understand that he will incur our implacable resentment.”



Neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the
Achaeans miss him. Then Jove said to Apollo, “Go, dear Phoebus, to Hector,
for Neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone down under the
sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. Had he not done so those gods
who are below with Saturn would have come to hear of the fight between us.
It is better for both of us that he should have curbed his anger and kept
out of my reach, for I should have had much trouble with him. Take, then,
your tasselled aegis, and shake it furiously, so as to set the Achaean
heroes in a panic; take, moreover, brave Hector, O Far-Darter, into your
own care, and rouse him to deeds of daring, till the Achaeans are sent
flying back to their ships and to the Hellespont. From that point I will
think it well over, how the Achaeans may have a respite from their
troubles.”



Apollo obeyed his father’s saying, and left the crests of Ida, flying like
a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. He found Hector no
longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come to
himself again. He knew those who were about him, and the sweat and hard
breathing had left him from the moment when the will of aegis-bearing Jove
had revived him. Apollo stood beside him and said, “Hector son of Priam,
why are you so faint, and why are you here away from the others? Has any
mishap befallen you?”



Hector in a weak voice answered, “And which, kind sir, of the gods are
you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax struck me on the chest
with a stone as I was killing his comrades at the ships of the Achaeans,
and compelled me to leave off fighting? I made sure that this very day I
should breathe my last and go down into the house of Hades.”



Then King Apollo said to him, “Take heart; the son of Saturn has sent you
a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend you, even me, Phoebus
Apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian hitherto not only of
yourself but of your city. Now, therefore, order your horsemen to drive
their chariots to the ships in great multitudes. I will go before your
horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the Achaeans in flight.”



As he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people. And
as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops gloriously over
the plain to the place where he is wont to take his bath in the river—he
tosses his head, and his mane streams over his shoulders as in all the
pride of his strength he flies full speed to the pastures where the mares
are feeding—even so Hector, when he heard what the god said, urged
his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as his limbs could take him. As
country peasants set their hounds on to a homed stag or wild goat—he
has taken shelter under rock or thicket, and they cannot find him, but,
lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts have roused stands in their path, and
they are in no further humour for the chase—even so the Achaeans
were still charging on in a body, using their swords and spears pointed at
both ends, but when they saw Hector going about among his men they were
afraid, and their hearts fell down into their feet.



Then spoke Thoas son of Andraemon, leader of the Aetolians, a man who
could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close fight, while
few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided. He then with
all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: “What, in heaven’s name,
do I now see? Is it not Hector come to life again? Every one made sure he
had been killed by Ajax son of Telamon, but it seems that one of the gods
has again rescued him. He has killed many of us Danaans already, and I
take it will yet do so, for the hand of Jove must be with him or he would
never dare show himself so masterful in the forefront of the battle. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say; let us order the main body of our
forces to fall back upon the ships, but let those of us who profess to be
the flower of the army stand firm, and see whether we cannot hold Hector
back at the point of our spears as soon as he comes near us; I conceive
that he will then think better of it before he tries to charge into the
press of the Danaans.”



Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. Those who were about
Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of Teucer, Meriones, and
Meges peer of Mars called all their best men about them and sustained the
fight against Hector and the Trojans, but the main body fell back upon the
ships of the Achaeans.



The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with Hector striding on at
their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded in cloud about his
shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe, which
Vulcan the smith had given Jove to strike terror into the hearts of men.
With this in his hand he led on the Trojans.



The Argives held together and stood their ground. The cry of battle rose
high from either side, and the arrows flew from the bowstrings. Many a
spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies of many a valiant
warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before they could taste of
man’s fair flesh and glut themselves with blood. So long as Phoebus Apollo
held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the weapons on either side
took effect and the people fell, but when he shook it straight in the face
of the Danaans and raised his mighty battle-cry their hearts fainted
within them and they forgot their former prowess. As when two wild beasts
spring in the dead of night on a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep
when the herdsman is not there—even so were the Danaans struck
helpless, for Apollo filled them with panic and gave victory to Hector and
the Trojans.



The fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where
they best could. Hector killed Stichius and Arcesilaus, the one, leader of
the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of Menestheus. Aeneas
killed Medon and Iasus. The first was bastard son to Oileus, and brother
to Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own country, for he had
killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom Oileus had married.
Iasus had become a leader of the Athenians, and was son of Sphelus the son
of Boucolos. Polydamas killed Mecisteus, and Polites Echius, in the front
of the battle, while Agenor slew Clonius. Paris struck Deiochus from
behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he was flying among the
foremost, and the point of the spear went clean through him.



While they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the Achaeans were
flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced back
within their wall. Hector then cried out to the Trojans, “Forward to the
ships, and let the spoils be. If I see any man keeping back on the other
side the wall away from the ships I will have him killed: his kinsmen and
kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs shall tear him in
pieces in front of our city.”



As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses’ shoulders and called to the
Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted with a cry that rent
the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his own. Phoebus Apollo
went before, and kicked down the banks of the deep trench into its middle
so as to make a great broad bridge, as broad as the throw of a spear when
a man is trying his strength. The Trojan battalions poured over the
bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. He kicked down
the wall of the Achaeans as easily as a child who playing on the sea-shore
has built a house of sand and then kicks it down again and destroys it—even
so did you, O Apollo, shed toil and trouble upon the Argives, filling them
with panic and confusion.



Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out to one
another and raising their hands with loud cries every man to heaven.
Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, lifted up his hands
to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently than any of
them. “Father Jove,” said he, “if ever any one in wheat-growing Argos
burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or heifer and prayed that he might
return safely home, whereon you bowed your head to him in assent, bear it
in mind now, and suffer not the Trojans to triumph thus over the
Achaeans.”



All-counselling Jove thundered loudly in answer to the prayer of the aged
son of Neleus. When they heard Jove thunder they flung themselves yet more
fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking over the bulwarks of a ship
when the sea runs high before a gale—for it is the force of the wind
that makes the waves so great—even so did the Trojans spring over
the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards. The two sides
fought with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand encounter-the
Trojans from their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing up into their ships
and wielding the long pikes that were lying on the decks ready for use in
a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze.



Now Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting about the
wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships, remained sitting in the
tent of good Eurypylus, entertaining him with his conversation and
spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. When, however, he saw the
Trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the Achaeans were
clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and smote his two thighs
with the flat of his hands. “Eurypylus,” said he in his dismay, “I know
you want me badly, but I cannot stay with you any longer, for there is
hard fighting going on; a servant shall take care of you now, for I must
make all speed to Achilles, and induce him to fight if I can; who knows
but with heaven’s help I may persuade him. A man does well to listen to
the advice of a friend.”



When he had thus spoken he went his way. The Achaeans stood firm and
resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these were fewer in number,
they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could the Trojans
break the Achaean ranks and make their way in among the tents and ships.
As a carpenter’s line gives a true edge to a piece of ship’s timber, in
the hand of some skilled workman whom Minerva has instructed in all kinds
of useful arts—even so level was the issue of the fight between the
two sides, as they fought some round one and some round another.



Hector made straight for Ajax, and the two fought fiercely about the same
ship. Hector could not force Ajax back and fire the ship, nor yet could
Ajax drive Hector from the spot to which heaven had brought him.



Then Ajax struck Caletor son of Clytius in the chest with a spear as he
was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to the ground and the
torch dropped from his hand. When Hector saw his cousin fallen in front of
the ship he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying, “Trojans, Lycians,
and Dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot, but rescue the son of
Clytius lest the Achaeans strip him of his armour now that he has fallen.”



He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him, but he hit Lycophron a
follower of Ajax, who came from Cythera, but was living with Ajax inasmuch
as he had killed a man among the Cythereans. Hector’s spear struck him on
the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the ship’s prow on to
the ground with no life left in him. Ajax shook with rage and said to his
brother, “Teucer, my good fellow, our trusty comrade the son of Mastor has
fallen, he came to live with us from Cythera and whom we honoured as much
as our own parents. Hector has just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows
at once and the bow which Phoebus Apollo gave you.”



Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver in his
hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the Trojans, and hit Cleitus
the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the noble son of Panthous, with
the reins in his hands as he was attending to his horses; he was in the
middle of the very thickest part of the fight, doing good service to
Hector and the Trojans, but evil had now come upon him, and not one of
those who were fain to do so could avert it, for the arrow struck him on
the back of the neck. He fell from his chariot and his horses shook the
empty car as they swerved aside. King Polydamas saw what had happened, and
was the first to come up to the horses; he gave them in charge to Astynous
son of Protiaon, and ordered him to look on, and to keep the horses near
at hand. He then went back and took his place in the front ranks.



Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hector, and there would have been no
more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed him then and
there: Jove, however, who kept watch over Hector, had his eyes on Teucer,
and deprived him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring for him just as
he was drawing it and about to take his aim; on this the arrow went astray
and the bow fell from his hands. Teucer shook with anger and said to his
brother, “Alas, see how heaven thwarts us in all we do; it has broken my
bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand, though I strung it this
self-same morning that it might serve me for many an arrow.”



Ajax son of Telamon answered, “My good fellow, let your bow and your
arrows be, for Jove has made them useless in order to spite the Danaans.
Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder, and both fight the
Trojans yourself and urge others to do so. They may be successful for the
moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it a hard matter to take
the ships.”



Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a shield four
hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set his helmet
well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it;
he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith he was by the
side of Ajax.



When Hector saw that Teucer’s bow was of no more use to him, he shouted
out to the Trojans and Lycians, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in
close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle here at the ships,
for I see the weapon of one of their chieftains made useless by the hand
of Jove. It is easy to see when Jove is helping people and means to help
them still further, or again when he is bringing them down and will do
nothing for them; he is now on our side, and is going against the Argives.
Therefore swarm round the ships and fight. If any of you is struck by
spear or sword and loses his life, let him die; he dies with honour who
dies fighting for his country; and he will leave his wife and children
safe behind him, with his house and allotment unplundered if only the
Achaeans can be driven back to their own land, they and their ships.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Ajax on the other
side exhorted his comrades saying, “Shame on you Argives, we are now
utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by driving the enemy from our
ships. Do you think, if Hector takes them, that you will be able to get
home by land? Can you not hear him cheering on his whole host to fire our
fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance but in
battle? Our only course is to fight them with might and main; we had
better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and without
issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves.”



With these words he put life and soul into them all. Hector then killed
Schedius son of Perimedes, leader of the Phoceans, and Ajax killed
Laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to Antenor. Polydamas killed
Otus of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus and chief of the proud
Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon him, but Polydamas crouched
down, and he missed him, for Apollo would not suffer the son of Panthous
to fall in battle; but the spear hit Croesmus in the middle of his chest,
whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped him of his
armour. At that moment the valiant soldier Dolops son of Lampus sprang
upon Lampus was son of Laomedon and noted for his valour, while his son
Dolops was versed in all the ways of war. He then struck the middle of the
son of Phyleus’ shield with his spear, setting on him at close quarters,
but his good corslet made with plates of metal saved him; Phyleus had
brought it from Ephyra and the river Selleis, where his host, King
Euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect him. It now
served to save the life of his son. Then Meges struck the topmost crest of
Dolops’s bronze helmet with his spear and tore away its plume of
horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was it tumbled down
into the dust. While he was still fighting and confident of victory,
Menelaus came up to help Meges, and got by the side of Dolops unperceived;
he then speared him in the shoulder, from behind, and the point, driven so
furiously, went through into his chest, whereon he fell headlong. The two
then made towards him to strip him of his armour, but Hector called on all
his brothers for help, and he especially upbraided brave Melanippus son of
Hiketaon, who erewhile used to pasture his herds of cattle in Percote
before the war broke out; but when the ships of the Danaans came, he went
back to Ilius, where he was eminent among the Trojans, and lived near
Priam who treated him as one of his own sons. Hector now rebuked him and
said, “Why, Melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note of the
death of your kinsman, and do you not see how they are trying to take
Dolops’s armour? Follow me; there must be no fighting the Argives from a
distance now, but we must do so in close combat till either we kill them
or they take the high wall of Ilius and slay her people.”



He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippus followed after. Meanwhile
Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. “My friends,” he cried,
“be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves in battle so as to win
respect from one another. Men who respect each other’s good opinion are
less likely to be killed than those who do not, but in flight there is
neither gain nor glory.”



Thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back the
Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as with a wall
of bronze, while Jove urged on the Trojans. Menelaus of the loud
battle-cry urged Antilochus on. “Antilochus,” said he, “you are young and
there is none of the Achaeans more fleet of foot or more valiant than you
are. See if you cannot spring upon some Trojan and kill him.”



He hurried away when he had thus spurred Antilochus, who at once darted
out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking carefully round
him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not speed from
his hand without effect, for it struck Melanippus the proud son of
Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Antilochus sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a hunter has
hit as it was breaking away from its covert, and killed it. Even so, O
Melanippus, did stalwart Antilochus spring upon you to strip you of your
armour; but noble Hector marked him, and came running up to him through
the thick of the battle. Antilochus, brave soldier though he was, would
not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature which knows it
has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a dog or a man who is
herding his cattle, before a body of men can be gathered to attack it.
Even so did the son of Nestor fly, and the Trojans and Hector with a cry
that rent the air showered their weapons after him; nor did he turn round
and stay his flight till he had reached his comrades.



The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships in
fulfilment of the behests of Jove who kept spurring them on to new deeds
of daring, while he deadened the courage of the Argives and defeated them
by encouraging the Trojans. For he meant giving glory to Hector son of
Priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he had fulfilled
the unrighteous prayer that Thetis had made him; Jove, therefore, bided
his time till he should see the glare of a blazing ship. From that hour he
was about so to order that the Trojans should be driven back from the
ships and to vouchsafe glory to the Achaeans. With this purpose he
inspired Hector son of Priam, who was eager enough already, to assail the
ships. His fury was as that of Mars, or as when a fire is raging in the
glades of some dense forest upon the mountains; he foamed at the mouth,
his eyes glared under his terrible eyebrows, and his helmet quivered on
his temples by reason of the fury with which he fought. Jove from heaven
was with him, and though he was but one against many, vouchsafed him
victory and glory; for he was doomed to an early death, and already Pallas
Minerva was hurrying on the hour of his destruction at the hands of the
son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept trying to break the ranks of the
enemy wherever he could see them thickest, and in the goodliest armour;
but do what he might he could not break through them, for they stood as a
tower foursquare, or as some high cliff rising from the grey sea that
braves the anger of the gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it.
He fell upon them like flames of fire from every quarter. As when a wave,
raised mountain high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and covers it
deep in foam, the fierce winds roar against the mast, the hearts of the
sailors fail them for fear, and they are saved but by a very little from
destruction—even so were the hearts of the Achaeans fainting within
them. Or as a savage lion attacking a herd of cows while they are feeding
by thousands in the low-lying meadows by some wide-watered shore—the
herdsman is at his wit’s end how to protect his herd and keeps going about
now in the van and now in the rear of his cattle, while the lion springs
into the thick of them and fastens on a cow so that they all tremble for
fear—even so were the Achaeans utterly panic-stricken by Hector and
father Jove. Nevertheless Hector only killed Periphetes of Mycenae; he was
son of Copreus who was wont to take the orders of King Eurystheus to
mighty Hercules, but the son was a far better man than the father in every
way; he was fleet of foot, a valiant warrior, and in understanding ranked
among the foremost men of Mycenae. He it was who then afforded Hector a
triumph, for as he was turning back he stumbled against the rim of his
shield which reached his feet, and served to keep the javelins off him. He
tripped against this and fell face upward, his helmet ringing loudly about
his head as he did so. Hector saw him fall and ran up to him; he then
thrust a spear into his chest, and killed him close to his own comrades.
These, for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves
terribly afraid of Hector.



They had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been drawn
up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans came pouring after
them. The Argives were driven back from the first row of ships, but they
made a stand by their tents without being broken up and scattered; shame
and fear restrained them. They kept shouting incessantly to one another,
and Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, was loudest in
imploring every man by his parents, and beseeching him to stand firm.



“Be men, my friends,” he cried, “and respect one another’s good opinion.
Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your property, and your
parents whether these be alive or dead. On their behalf though they are
not here, I implore you to stand firm, and not to turn in flight.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Minerva lifted the
thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light fell upon them,
alike on the side of the ships and on that where the fight was raging.
They could see Hector and all his men, both those in the rear who were
taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting by the ships.



Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but strode
from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands twelve cubits long
and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in feats of horsemanship couples
four horses together and comes tearing full speed along the public way
from the country into some large town—many both men and women marvel
as they see him for he keeps all the time changing his horse, springing
from one to another without ever missing his feet while the horses are at
a gallop—even so did Ajax go striding from one ship’s deck to
another, and his voice went up into the heavens. He kept on shouting his
orders to the Danaans and exhorting them to defend their ships and tents;
neither did Hector remain within the main body of the Trojan warriors, but
as a dun eagle swoops down upon a flock of wild-fowl feeding near a river—geese,
it may be, or cranes, or long-necked swans—even so did Hector make
straight for a dark-prowed ship, rushing right towards it; for Jove with
his mighty hand impelled him forward, and roused his people to follow him.



And now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. You would have
thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so fiercely did they
fight; and this was the mind in which they were—the Achaeans did not
believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves doomed,
while there was not a Trojan but his heart beat high with the hope of
firing the ships and putting the Achaean heroes to the sword.



Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hector seized the stern of the good
ship that had brought Protesilaus to Troy, but never bore him back to his
native land. Round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand fight
between Danaans and Trojans. They did not fight at a distance with bows
and javelins, but with one mind hacked at one another in close combat with
their mighty swords and spears pointed at both ends; they fought moreover
with keen battle-axes and with hatchets. Many a good stout blade hilted
and scabbarded with iron, fell from hand or shoulder as they fought, and
the earth ran red with blood. Hector, when he had seized the ship, would
not loose his hold but held on to its curved stern and shouted to the
Trojans, “Bring fire, and raise the battle-cry all of you with a single
voice. Now has Jove vouchsafed us a day that will pay us for all the rest;
this day we shall take the ships which came hither against heaven’s will,
and which have caused us such infinite suffering through the cowardice of
our councillors, who when I would have done battle at the ships held me
back and forbade the host to follow me; if Jove did then indeed warp our
judgements, himself now commands me and cheers me on.”



As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more fiercely on the Achaeans, and
Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was overcome by the darts that were
flung at him, and made sure that he was doomed. Therefore he left the
raised deck at the stern, and stepped back on to the seven-foot bench of
the oarsmen. Here he stood on the look-out, and with his spear held back
any Trojan whom he saw bringing fire to the ships. All the time he kept on
shouting at the top of his voice and exhorting the Danaans. “My friends,”
he cried, “Danaan heroes, servants of Mars, be men my friends, and fight
with might and with main. Can we hope to find helpers hereafter, or a wall
to shield us more surely than the one we have? There is no strong city
within reach, whence we may draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our
favour. We are on the plain of the armed Trojans with the sea behind us,
and far from our own country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of
our hands and in hard fighting.”



As he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any
Trojan made towards the ships with fire at Hector’s bidding, he would be
on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear. Twelve men
did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships.

=== ILIAD BOOK 16 ===

Fire being now thrown on the ship of Protesilaus, Patroclus fights in the
armour of Achilles—He drives the Trojans back, but is in the end
killed by Euphorbus and Hector.



Thus did they fight about the ship of Protesilaus. Then Patroclus drew
near to Achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring
whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. When
Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, “Why,
Patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes
running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried—she
catches hold of her mother’s dress to stay her though she is in a hurry,
and looks tearfully up until her mother carries her—even such tears,
Patroclus, are you now shedding. Have you anything to say to the Myrmidons
or to myself? or have you had news from Phthia which you alone know? They
tell me Menoetius son of Actor is still alive, as also Peleus son of
Aeacus, among the Myrmidons—men whose loss we two should bitterly
deplore; or are you grieving about the Argives and the way in which they
are being killed at the ships, through their own high-handed doings? Do
not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may know about it.”



Then, O knight Patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, “Achilles, son of
Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do not be angry, but I weep for
the disaster that has now befallen the Argives. All those who have been
their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by sword or spear.
Brave Diomed son of Tydeus has been hit with a spear, while famed Ulysses
and Agamemnon have received sword-wounds; Eurypylus again has been struck
with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries are attending to these
heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are you still, O Achilles, so
inexorable? May it never be my lot to nurse such a passion as you have
done, to the baning of your own good name. Who in future story will speak
well of you unless you now save the Argives from ruin? You know no pity;
knight Peleus was not your father nor Thetis your mother, but the grey sea
bore you and the sheer cliffs begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you.
If however you are kept back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your
mother Thetis has told you something from the mouth of Jove, at least send
me and the Myrmidons with me, if I may bring deliverance to the Danaans.
Let me moreover wear your armour; the Trojans may thus mistake me for you
and quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the Achaeans may have
breathing time—which while they are fighting may hardly be. We who
are fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to
their own city.”



He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own
destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, “What, noble
Patroclus, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am heeding, nor
has my mother told me anything from the mouth of Jove, but I am cut to the
very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because he is
more powerful than I am. This, after all that I have gone through, is more
than I can endure. The girl whom the sons of the Achaeans chose for me,
whom I won as the fruit of my spear on having sacked a city—her has
King Agamemnon taken from me as though I were some common vagrant. Still,
let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his anger for ever; I said I would
not relent till battle and the cry of war had reached my own ships;
nevertheless, now gird my armour about your shoulders, and lead the
Myrmidons to battle, for the dark cloud of Trojans has burst furiously
over our fleet; the Argives are driven back on to the beach, cooped within
a narrow space, and the whole people of Troy has taken heart to sally out
against them, because they see not the visor of my helmet gleaming near
them. Had they seen this, there would not have been a creek nor grip that
had not been filled with their dead as they fled back again. And so it
would have been, if only King Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. As it is
the Trojans have beset our host. Diomed son of Tydeus no longer wields his
spear to defend the Danaans, neither have I heard the voice of the son of
Atreus coming from his hated head, whereas that of murderous Hector rings
in my cars as he gives orders to the Trojans, who triumph over the
Achaeans and fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. But even so,
Patroclus, fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and
prevent us from being able to return. Do, however, as I now bid you, that
you may win me great honour from all the Danaans, and that they may
restore the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. When
you have driven the Trojans from the ships, come back again. Though Juno’s
thundering husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight the
Trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that should be
mine. And do not for lust of battle go on killing the Trojans nor lead the
Achaeans on to Ilius, lest one of the ever-living gods from Olympus attack
you—for Phoebus Apollo loves them well: return when you have freed
the ships from peril, and let others wage war upon the plain. Would, by
father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that not a single man of all the Trojans
might be left alive, nor yet of the Argives, but that we two might be
alone left to tear aside the mantle that veils the brow of Troy.”



Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no longer hold his ground for the
shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of Jove and the javelins of
the Trojans were too much for him; the helmet that gleamed about his
temples rang with the continuous clatter of the missiles that kept pouring
on to it and on to the cheek-pieces that protected his face. Moreover his
left shoulder was tired with having held his shield so long, yet for all
this, let fly at him as they would, they could not make him give ground.
He could hardly draw his breath, the sweat rained from every pore of his
body, he had not a moment’s respite, and on all sides he was beset by
danger upon danger.



And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your mansions on Olympus, how fire was
thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hector came close up and let drive
with his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax. He cut it clean in two
just behind where the point was fastened on to the shaft of the spear.
Ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the bronze
point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground. Ajax knew
the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that Jove had now
left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for the Trojans.
Therefore he drew back, and the Trojans flung fire upon the ship which was
at once wrapped in flame.



The fire was now flaring about the ship’s stern, whereon Achilles smote
his two thighs and said to Patroclus, “Up, noble knight, for I see the
glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy our ships, and
there be no way by which we may retreat. Gird on your armour at once while
I call our people together.”



As he spoke Patroclus put on his armour. First he greaved his legs with
greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after this
he donned the cuirass of the son of Aeacus, richly inlaid and studded. He
hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then his
mighty shield. On his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought, with a
crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it. He grasped two
redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but he did not take the spear of
noble Achilles, so stout and strong, for none other of the Achaeans could
wield it, though Achilles could do so easily. This was the ashen spear
from Mount Pelion, which Chiron had cut upon a mountain top and had given
to Peleus, wherewith to deal out death among heroes. He bade Automedon
yoke his horses with all speed, for he was the man whom he held in honour
next after Achilles, and on whose support in battle he could rely most
firmly. Automedon therefore yoked the fleet horses Xanthus and Balius,
steeds that could fly like the wind: these were they whom the harpy
Podarge bore to the west wind, as she was grazing in a meadow by the
waters of the river Oceanus. In the side traces he set the noble horse
Pedasus, whom Achilles had brought away with him when he sacked the city
of Eetion, and who, mortal steed though he was, could take his place along
with those that were immortal.



Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade his
Myrmidons put on their armour. Even as fierce ravening wolves that are
feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the mountains, and
their jaws are red with blood—they go in a pack to lap water from
the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood and
slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives them—even
so did the leaders and counsellors of the Myrmidons gather round the good
squire of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, and among them stood Achilles
himself cheering on both men and horses.



Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to Troy, and in each there was a
crew of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five captains whom he could
trust, while he was himself commander over them all. Menesthius of the
gleaming corslet, son to the river Spercheius that streams from heaven,
was captain of the first company. Fair Polydora daughter of Peleus bore
him to ever-flowing Spercheius—a woman mated with a god—but he
was called son of Borus son of Perieres, with whom his mother was living
as his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to gain her. The second
company was led by noble Eudorus, son to an unwedded woman. Polymele,
daughter of Phylas the graceful dancer, bore him; the mighty slayer of
Argos was enamoured of her as he saw her among the singing women at a
dance held in honour of Diana the rushing huntress of the golden arrows;
he therefore—Mercury, giver of all good—went with her into an
upper chamber, and lay with her in secret, whereon she bore him a noble
son Eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. When Ilithuia
goddess of the pains of childbirth brought him to the light of day, and
he saw the face of the sun, mighty Echecles son of Actor took the mother
to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her father Phylas brought
the child up, and took care of him, doting as fondly upon him as though he
were his own son. The third company was led by Pisander son of Maemalus,
the finest spearman among all the Myrmidons next to Achilles’ own comrade
Patroclus. The old knight Phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and
Alcimedon, noble son of Laerceus of the fifth.



When Achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their
captains, he charged them straitly saying, “Myrmidons, remember your
threats against the Trojans while you were at the ships in the time of my
anger, and you were all complaining of me. ‘Cruel son of Peleus,’ you
would say, ‘your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless are
you. You keep us here at the ships against our will; if you are so
relentless it were better we went home over the sea.’ Often have you
gathered and thus chided with me. The hour is now come for those high
feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep high
hearts each one of you to do battle with the Trojans.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they serried
their companies yet more closely when they heard the words of their king.
As the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house which is
to give shelter from the winds—even so closely were the helmets and
bossed shields set against one another. Shield pressed on shield, helm on
helm, and man on man; so close were they that the horse-hair plumes on the
gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each other as they bent their
heads.



In front of them all two men put on their armour—Patroclus and
Automedon—two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons. Then
Achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest which
silver-footed Thetis had given him to take on board ship, and which she
had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good thick rugs.
In this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which no man but
himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to any other god
save only to father Jove. He took the cup from the chest and cleansed it
with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and after he had washed
his hands he drew wine. Then he stood in the middle of the court and
prayed, looking towards heaven, and making his drink-offering of wine; nor
was he unseen of Jove whose joy is in thunder. “King Jove,” he cried,
“lord of Dodona, god of the Pelasgi, who dwellest afar, you who hold
wintry Dodona in your sway, where your prophets the Selli dwell around you
with their feet unwashed and their couches made upon the ground—if
you heard me when I prayed to you aforetime, and did me honour while you
sent disaster on the Achaeans, vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of yet this
further prayer. I shall stay here where my ships are lying, but I shall
send my comrade into battle at the head of many Myrmidons. Grant, O
all-seeing Jove, that victory may go with him; put your courage into his
heart that Hector may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight
alone, or whether his might is only then so indomitable when I myself
enter the turmoil of war. Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the
cry of battle from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his
armour and his comrades, fighters in close combat.”



Thus did he pray, and all-counselling Jove heard his prayer. Part of it he
did indeed vouchsafe him—but not the whole. He granted that
Patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused to
let him come safely out of the fight.



When he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, Achilles went
inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.



Then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce fight
that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans.



Meanwhile the armed band that was about Patroclus marched on till they
sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came swarming out like wasps
whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease,
whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung—or again, if
a wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will
come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones—even with such
rage and courage did the Myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their cry
of battle rose heavenwards. Patroclus called out to his men at the top of
his voice, “Myrmidons, followers of Achilles son of Peleus, be men my
friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory for the son
of Peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the Argives—he,
and his close fighting followers. The son of Atreus King Agamemnon will
thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the bravest of the
Achaeans.”



With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in a
body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with the cry which the
Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave son of Menoetius and
his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and their
battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet son of
Peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been reconciled to
Agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to see whither he
might fly for safety.



Patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men were
packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of Protesilaus. He hit
Pyraechmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen from the Amydon and the broad
waters of the river Axius; the spear struck him on the right shoulder, and
with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on this his men were thrown
into confusion, for by killing their leader, who was the finest soldier
among them, Patroclus struck panic into them all. He thus drove them from
the ship and quenched the fire that was then blazing—leaving the
half-burnt ship to lie where it was. The Trojans were now driven back with
a shout that rent the skies, while the Danaans poured after them from
their ships, shouting also without ceasing. As when Jove, gatherer of the
thunder-cloud, spreads a dense canopy on the top of some lofty mountain,
and all the peaks, the jutting headlands, and forest glades show out in
the great light that flashes from the bursting heavens, even so when the
Danaans had now driven back the fire from their ships, they took breath
for a little while; but the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the
Trojans were not driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle, and
were ousted from their ground only by sheer fighting.



The fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed one
another when and how they could. The valiant son of Menoetius first drove
his spear into the thigh of Areilycus just as he was turning round; the
point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell forward.
Meanwhile Menelaus struck Thoas in the chest, where it was exposed near
the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. The son of Phyleus saw Amphiclus
about to attack him, and ere he could do so took aim at the upper part of
his thigh, where the muscles are thicker than in any other part; the spear
tore through all the sinews of the leg, and his eyes were closed in
darkness. Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilochus, speared Atymnius, driving
the point of the spear through his throat, and down he fell. Maris then
sprang on Antilochus in hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and
bestrode the body spear in hand; but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for
him, and in a moment had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his
blow; his aim was true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root
of his arm, and tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to
the ground and his eyes were closed in darkness. Thus did these two noble
comrades of Sarpedon go down to Erebus slain by the two sons of Nestor;
they were the warrior sons of Amisodorus, who had reared the invincible
Chimaera, to the bane of many. Ajax son of Oileus sprang on Cleobulus and
took him alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then
and there by a sword-blow on the neck. The sword reeked with his blood,
while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him and closed his
eyes.



Peneleos and Lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each other
with their spears. They had both thrown without effect, so now they drew
their swords. Lycon struck the plumed crest of Peneleos’ helmet but his
sword broke at the hilt, while Peneleos smote Lycon on the neck under the
ear. The blade sank so deep that the head was held on by nothing but the
skin, and there was no more life left in him. Meriones gave chase to
Acamas on foot and caught him up just as he was about to mount his
chariot; he drove a spear through his right shoulder so that he fell
headlong from the car, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Idomeneus
speared Erymas in the mouth; the bronze point of the spear went clean
through it beneath the brain, crashing in among the white bones and
smashing them up. His teeth were all of them knocked out and the blood
came gushing in a stream from both his eyes; it also came gurgling up from
his mouth and nostrils, and the darkness of death enfolded him round
about.



Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each of them kill his man. As
ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they are
alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock through the
carelessness of the shepherd—and when the wolves see this they
pounce upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves—even
so did the Danaans now fall on the Trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries
in their panic and had no more fight left in them.



Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into Hector, but
Hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under cover of
his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing of the arrows
and the heavy thud of the spears. He well knew that the fortunes of the
day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect his
comrades.



As when a cloud goes up into heaven from Olympus, rising out of a clear
sky when Jove is brewing a gale—even with such panic stricken rout
did the Trojans now fly, and there was no order in their going. Hector’s
fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and he left the
Trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their will. Many a yoke
of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in the trench and left their
master’s car behind them. Patroclus gave chase, calling impetuously on the
Danaans and full of fury against the Trojans, who, being now no longer in
a body, filled all the ways with their cries of panic and rout; the air
was darkened with the clouds of dust they raised, and the horses strained
every nerve in their flight from the tents and ships towards the city.



Patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in
confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots were being smashed in
all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own car to fall
beneath the wheels of that of Patroclus, whose immortal steeds, given by
the gods to Peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they sped onward.
He was intent on trying to get near Hector, for he had set his heart on
spearing him, but Hector’s horses were now hurrying him away. As the whole
dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day when Jove rains his
hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement in their courts, and
driving justice therefrom without heed to the decrees of heaven—all
the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a new channel as they roar
headlong from the mountains to the dark sea, and it fares ill with the
works of men—even such was the stress and strain of the Trojan
horses in their flight.



Patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and drove
them back to the ships. They were doing their best to reach the city, but
he would not let them, and bore down on them between the river and the
ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. First he hit
Pronous with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim of his
shield, and he fell heavily to the ground. Next he sprang on Thestor son
of Enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot, for he had lost
his head and the reins had been torn out of his hands. Patroclus went up
to him and drove a spear into his right jaw; he thus hooked him by the
teeth and the spear pulled him over the rim of his car, as one who sits at
the end of some jutting rock and draws a strong fish out of the sea with a
hook and a line—even so with his spear did he pull Thestor all
gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on his face and he died
while falling. On this, as Erylaus was on coming to attack him, he struck
him full on the head with a stone, and his brains were all battered inside
his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to the ground and the pangs of death
took hold upon him. Then he laid low, one after the other, Erymas,
Amphoterus, Epaltes, Tlepolemus, Echius son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus,
Euippus and Polymelus son of Argeas.



Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics, being
overcome by Patroclus son of Menoetius, he rebuked the Lycians saying.
“Shame on you, where are you flying to? Show your mettle; I will myself
meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so masterful; he has
done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave man upon the ground.”



He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and Patroclus, when he saw this,
leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed at one another with loud
cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream and tear at one
another in some high mountain fastness. Somewhere beyond the ships, a food truck sold roasted chestnuts to the Myrmidons.



The son of scheming Saturn looked down upon them in pity and said to Juno
who was his wife and sister, “Alas, that it should be the lot of Sarpedon
whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of Patroclus. I am in two
minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set him down safe and
sound in the fertile land of Lycia, or to let him now fall by the hand of
the son of Menoetius.”



And Juno answered, “Most dread son of Saturn, what is this that you are
saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been fated, out
of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we shall not all of us be of
your mind. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, that if you
send Sarpedon safely to his own home, some other of the gods will be also
wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many sons of gods
fighting round the city of Troy, and you will make every one jealous. If,
however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him indeed fall by the hand
of Patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone out of him, send Death and
sweet Sleep to bear him off the field and take him to the broad lands of
Lycia, where his brothers and his kinsmen will bury him with mound and
pillar, in due honour to the dead.”



The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon the
earth in honour of his son whom Patroclus was about to kill on the rich
plain of Troy far from his home.



When they were now come close to one another Patroclus struck Thrasydemus,
the brave squire of Sarpedon, in the lower part of the belly, and killed
him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at Patroclus and missed him, but he
struck the horse Pedasus in the right shoulder, and it screamed aloud as
it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went out of it. The other two
horses began to plunge; the pole of the chariot cracked and they got
entangled in the reins through the fall of the horse that was yoked along
with them; but Automedon knew what to do; without the loss of a moment he
drew the keen blade that hung by his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse
adrift; whereon the other two righted themselves, and pulling hard at the
reins again went together into battle.



Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroclus, and again missed him, the
point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting him.
Patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from his hand in
vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the
ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine to
which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber for
ship-building—even so did he lie stretched at full length in front
of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained
dust. As when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and
fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing in its clutches—even
so did the leader of the Lycian warriors struggle in death as he fell by
the hand of Patroclus. He called on his trusty comrade and said, “Glaucus,
my brother, hero among heroes, put forth all your strength, fight with
might and main, now if ever quit yourself like a valiant soldier. First go
about among the Lycian captains and bid them fight for Sarpedon; then
yourself also do battle to save my armour from being taken. My name will
haunt you henceforth and for ever if the Achaeans rob me of my armour now
that I have fallen at their ships. Do your very utmost and call all my
people together.”



Death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroclus planted his heel on his
breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out along
with it, and he drew out both spear-point and Sarpedon’s soul at the same
time. Hard by the Myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were wild with
panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords.



Glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what Sarpedon said, for he
could not help him. He had to support his arm with his other hand, being
in great pain through the wound which Teucer’s arrow had given him when
Teucer was defending the wall as he, Glaucus, was assailing it. Therefore
he prayed to far-darting Apollo saying, “Hear me O king from your seat,
may be in the rich land of Lycia, or may be in Troy, for in all places you
can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as I now am. I have a
grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there is no staunching the
blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my hurt, so that I cannot grasp
my sword nor go among my foes and fight them, though our prince, Jove’s
son Sarpedon, is slain. Jove defended not his son, do you, therefore, O
king, heal me of my wound, ease my pain and grant me strength both to
cheer on the Lycians and to fight along with them round the body of him
who has fallen.”



Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He eased his pain,
staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength.
Glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had answered
his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the Lycian captains, and
bade them come to fight about the body of Sarpedon. From these he strode
on among the Trojans to Polydamas son of Panthous and Agenor; he then went
in search of Aeneas and Hector, and when he had found them he said,
“Hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies, who languish here for
your sake far from friends and home while you do nothing to support them.
Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has fallen—he who was at once
the right and might of Lycia; Mars has laid him low by the spear of
Patroclus. Stand by him, my friends, and suffer not the Myrmidons to strip
him of his armour, nor to treat his body with contumely in revenge for all
the Danaans whom we have speared at the ships.”



As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief;
for Sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of their
city, both as having much people with him, and himself the foremost among
them all. Led by Hector, who was infuriated by the fall of Sarpedon, they
made instantly for the Danaans with all their might, while the undaunted
spirit of Patroclus son of Menoetius cheered on the Achaeans. First he
spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who needed no bidding. “Ajaxes,” said he,
“may it now please you to show yourselves the men you have always been, or
even better—Sarpedon is fallen—he who was first to overleap
the wall of the Achaeans; let us take the body and outrage it; let us
strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his comrades if they try to
rescue his body.”



He spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides, therefore,
the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the Myrmidons and Achaeans on
the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought desperately about the
body of Sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while. Mighty was the din of their
armour as they came together, and Jove shed a thick darkness over the
fight, to increase the toil of the battle over the body of his son.



At first the Trojans made some headway against the Achaeans, for one of
the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus, son of noble
Agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of Budeum; but
presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge with
Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to Ilius the land of noble steeds to fight
the Trojans under Achilles. Hector now struck him on the head with a stone
just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains inside his helmet
were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost upon the body of
Sarpedon, and there died. Patroclus was enraged by the death of his
comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a hawk that swoops
down on a flock of daws or starlings. Even so swiftly, O noble knight
Patroclus, did you make straight for the Lycians and Trojans to avenge
your comrade. Forthwith he struck Sthenelaus the son of Ithaemenes on the
neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join it to the head and
spine. On this Hector and the front rank of his men gave ground. As far as
a man can throw a javelin when competing for some prize, or even in battle—so
far did the Trojans now retreat before the Achaeans. Glaucus, captain of
the Lycians, was the first to rally them, by killing Bathycles son of
Chalcon who lived in Hellas and was the richest man among the Myrmidons.
Glaucus turned round suddenly, just as Bathycles who was pursuing him was
about to lay hold of him, and drove his spear right into the middle of his
chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a
man filled the Achaeans with dismay, while the Trojans were exultant, and
came up in a body round the corpse. Nevertheless the Achaeans, mindful of
their prowess, bore straight down upon them.



Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the Trojans, Laogonus son of
Onetor, who was priest of Jove of Mt. Ida, and was honoured by the people
as though he were a god. Meriones struck him under the jaw and ear, so
that life went out of him and the darkness of death laid hold upon him.
Aeneas then aimed a spear at Meriones, hoping to hit him under the shield
as he was advancing, but Meriones saw it coming and stooped forward to
avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the point stuck in the
ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Mars robbed it of its
force. The spear, therefore, sped from Aeneas’s hand in vain and fell
quivering to the ground. Aeneas was angry and said, “Meriones, you are a
good dancer, but if I had hit you my spear would soon have made an end of
you.”



And Meriones answered, “Aeneas, for all your bravery, you will not be able
to make an end of every one who comes against you. You are only a mortal
like myself, and if I were to hit you in the middle of your shield with my
spear, however strong and self-confident you may be, I should soon
vanquish you, and you would yield your life to Hades of the noble steeds.”



On this the son of Menoetius rebuked him and said, “Meriones, hero though
you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches, my good friend, will
not make the Trojans draw away from the dead body; some of them must go
under ground first; blows for battle, and words for council; fight,
therefore, and say nothing.”



He led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. As the
sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the mountains—and the
thud of their axes is heard afar—even such a din now rose from
earth-clash of bronze armour and of good ox-hide shields, as men smote
each other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. A man had
need of good eyesight now to know Sarpedon, so covered was he from head to
foot with spears and blood and dust. Men swarmed about the body, as flies
that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are brimming with
milk—even so did they gather round Sarpedon; nor did Jove turn his
keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept looking at it all
the time, for he was settling how best to kill Patroclus, and considering
whether Hector should be allowed to end him now in the fight round the
body of Sarpedon, and strip him of his armour, or whether he should let
him give yet further trouble to the Trojans. In the end, he deemed it best
that the brave squire of Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hector and
the Trojans back towards the city and take the lives of many. First,
therefore, he made Hector turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his
chariot and fled, bidding the other Trojans fly also, for he saw that the
scales of Jove had turned against him. Neither would the brave Lycians
stand firm; they were dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to
the heart amid a heap of corpses—for when the son of Saturn made the
fight wax hot many had fallen above him. The Achaeans, therefore stripped
the gleaming armour from his shoulders and the brave son of Menoetius gave
it to his men to take to the ships. Then Jove lord of the storm-cloud said
to Apollo, “Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you, and take Sarpedon out of range
of the weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and then bear him a
long way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him with
ambrosia, and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the
arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who will carry him
straightway to the rich land of Lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen will
inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in due
honour to the dead.”



Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father’s saying, and came down from the
heights of Ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took Sarpedon out
of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off, where he washed
him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and clothed him in immortal
raiment; this done, he committed him to the arms of the two fleet
messengers, Death, and Sleep, who presently set him down in the rich land
of Lycia.



Meanwhile Patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to Automedon,
pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and foolishness of his heart.
Had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of Peleus, he would have escaped
death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of Jove pass man’s
understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight and snatch victory
from his grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as he now did when
he put a high spirit into the heart of Patroclus.



Who then first, and who last, was slain by you, O Patroclus, when the gods
had now called you to meet your doom? First Adrestus, Autonous, Echeclus,
Perimus the son of Megas, Epistor and Melanippus; after these he killed
Elasus, Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew, but the rest saved themselves
by flight.



The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken Troy by the hands of
Patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not Phoebus Apollo
taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the
Trojans. Thrice did Patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and
thrice did Apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own immortal
hands. When Patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a fourth time,
Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, “Draw back, noble
Patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the Trojan chieftains,
nor yet will it be that of Achilles who is a far better man than you are.”
On hearing this, Patroclus withdrew to some distance and avoided the anger
of Apollo.



Meanwhile Hector was waiting with his horses inside the Scaean gates, in
doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the army
inside the gates. As he was thus doubting Phoebus Apollo drew near him in
the likeness of a young and lusty warrior Asius, who was Hector’s uncle,
being own brother to Hecuba, and son of Dymas who lived in Phrygia by the
waters of the river Sangarius; in his likeness Jove’s son Apollo now spoke
to Hector saying, “Hector, why have you left off fighting? It is ill done
of you. If I were as much better a man than you, as I am worse, you should
soon rue your slackness. Drive straight towards Patroclus, if so be that
Apollo may grant you a triumph over him, and you may rule him.”



With this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and Hector bade
Cebriones drive again into the fight. Apollo passed in among them, and
struck panic into the Argives, while he gave triumph to Hector and the
Trojans. Hector let the other Danaans alone and killed no man, but drove
straight at Patroclus. Patroclus then sprang from his chariot to the
ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged stone as
large as his hand could hold. He stood still and threw it, nor did it go
far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for the stone
struck Cebriones, Hector’s charioteer, a bastard son of Priam, as he held
the reins in his hands. The stone hit him on the forehead and drove his
brows into his head for the bone was smashed, and his eyes fell to the
ground at his feet. He dropped dead from his chariot as though he were
diving, and there was no more life left in him. Over him did you then
vaunt, O knight Patroclus, saying, “Bless my heart, how active he is, and
how well he dives. If we had been at sea this fellow would have dived from
the ship’s side and brought up as many oysters as the whole crew could
stomach, even in rough water, for he has dived beautifully off his chariot
on to the ground. It seems, then, that there are divers also among the
Trojans.”



As he spoke he flung himself on Cebriones with the spring, as it were, of
a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the chest,
and his courage is his own bane—even so furiously, O Patroclus, did
you then spring upon Cebriones. Hector sprang also from his chariot to the
ground. The pair then fought over the body of Cebriones. As two lions
fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that they
have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, Patroclus son of
Menoetius and brave Hector, hack and hew at one another over the corpse of
Cebriones. Hector would not let him go when he had once got him by the
head, while Patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a fierce fight raged
between the other Danaans and Trojans. As the east and south wind buffet
one another when they beat upon some dense forest on the mountains—there
is beech and ash and spreading cornel; the top of the trees roar as they
beat on one another, and one can hear the boughs cracking and breaking—even
so did the Trojans and Achaeans spring upon one another and lay about each
other, and neither side would give way. Many a pointed spear fell to
ground and many a winged arrow sped from its bowstring about the body of
Cebriones; many a great stone, moreover, beat on many a shield as they
fought around his body, but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust,
all huge and hugely, heedless of his driving now.



So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of either side
were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he went down towards the
time when men loose their oxen, the Achaeans proved to be beyond all
forecast stronger, so that they drew Cebriones out of range of the darts
and tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the armour from his shoulders.
Then Patroclus sprang like Mars with fierce intent and a terrific shout
upon the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but as he was coming on
like a god for a time, then, O Patroclus, was the hour of your end
approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell earnest. Patroclus did not see
him as he moved about in the crush, for he was enshrouded in thick
darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his back and his broad
shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his eyes turned dizzy.
Phoebus Apollo beat the helmet from off his head, and it rolled rattling
off under the horses’ feet, where its horse-hair plumes were all begrimed
with dust and blood. Never indeed had that helmet fared so before, for it
had served to protect the head and comely forehead of the godlike hero
Achilles. Now, however, Zeus delivered it over to be worn by Hector.
Nevertheless the end of Hector also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so
great and so strong, was broken in the hand of Patroclus, while his shield
that covered him from head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band
that held it, and Apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet.



On this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as one
dazed; whereon Euphorbus son of Panthous a Dardanian, the best spearman of
his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner, came behind him
and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between the shoulders.
This man as soon as ever he had come up with his chariot had dismounted
twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of war—he it was, O
knight Patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you, but he did not quite
overpower you. Euphorbus then ran back into the crowd, after drawing his
ashen spear out of the wound; he would not stand firm and wait for
Patroclus, unarmed though he now was, to attack him; but Patroclus
unnerved, alike by the blow the god had given him and by the spear-wound,
drew back under cover of his men in fear for his life. Hector on this,
seeing him to be wounded and giving ground, forced his way through the
ranks, and when close up with him struck him in the lower part of the
belly with a spear, driving the bronze point right through it, so that he
fell heavily to the ground to the great grief of the Achaeans. As when a
lion has fought some fierce wild boar and worsted him—the two fight
furiously upon the mountains over some little fountain at which they would
both drink, and the lion has beaten the boar till he can hardly breathe—even
so did Hector son of Priam take the life of the brave son of Menoetius who
had killed so many, striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him
the while. “Patroclus,” said he, “you deemed that you should sack our
city, rob our Trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your
ships to your own country. Fool; Hector and his fleet horses were ever
straining their utmost to defend them. I am foremost of all the Trojan
warriors to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures
shall devour you here. Poor wretch, Achilles with all his bravery availed
you nothing; and yet I ween when you left him he charged you straitly
saying, ‘Come not back to the ships, knight Patroclus, till you have rent
the blood-stained shirt of murderous Hector about his body.’ Thus I ween
did he charge you, and your fool’s heart answered him ‘yea’ within you.”



Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, O knight Patroclus:
“Hector, vaunt as you will, for Jove the son of Saturn and Apollo have
vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily, and
they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty such men
as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my spear. Fate
and the son of Leto have overpowered me, and among mortal men Euphorbus;
you are yourself third only in the killing of me. I say further, and lay
my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a little season; death
and the day of your doom are close upon you, and they will lay you low by
the hand of Achilles son of Aeacus.”



When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left his
body and flitted down to the house of Hades, mourning its sad fate and
bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. Dead though he
was, Hector still spoke to him saying, “Patroclus, why should you thus
foretell my doom? Who knows but Achilles, son of lovely Thetis, may be
smitten by my spear and die before me?”



As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot
upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. He then went
spear in hand after Automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of Aeacus,
for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the gods had
given as a rich gift to Peleus bore him swiftly from the field.

=== ILIAD BOOK 17 ===

The fight around the body of Patroclus.



Brave Menelaus son of Atreus now came to know that Patroclus had fallen,
and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to bestride
him. As a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did yellow-haired
Menelaus bestride Patroclus. He held his round shield and his spear in
front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face him. But the son
of Panthous had also noted the body, and came up to Menelaus saying,
“Menelaus, son of Atreus, draw back, leave the body, and let the
blood-stained spoils be. I was first of the Trojans and their brave allies
to drive my spear into Patroclus, let me, therefore, have my full glory
among the Trojans, or I will take aim and kill you.”



To this Menelaus answered in great anger “By father Jove, boasting is an
ill thing. The pard is not more bold, nor the lion nor savage wild boar,
which is fiercest and most dauntless of all creatures, than are the proud
sons of Panthous. Yet Hyperenor did not see out the days of his youth when
he made light of me and withstood me, deeming me the meanest soldier among
the Danaans. His own feet never bore him back to gladden his wife and
parents. Even so shall I make an end of you too, if you withstand me; get
you back into the crowd and do not face me, or it shall be worse for you.
Even a fool may be wise after the event.”



Euphorbus would not listen, and said, “Now indeed, Menelaus, shall you pay
for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted, and whose wife you
widowed in her bridal chamber, while you brought grief unspeakable on his
parents. I shall comfort these poor people if I bring your head and armour
and place them in the hands of Panthous and noble Phrontis. The time is
come when this matter shall be fought out and settled, for me or against
me.”



As he spoke he struck Menelaus full on the shield, but the spear did not
go through, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus then took aim,
praying to father Jove as he did so; Euphorbus was drawing back, and
Menelaus struck him about the roots of his throat, leaning his whole
weight on the spear, so as to drive it home. The point went clean through
his neck, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the
ground. His hair which was like that of the Graces, and his locks so
deftly bound in bands of silver and gold, were all bedrabbled with blood.
As one who has grown a fine young olive tree in a clear space where there
is abundance of water—the plant is full of promise, and though the
winds beat upon it from every quarter it puts forth its white blossoms
till the blasts of some fierce hurricane sweep down upon it and level it
with the ground—even so did Menelaus strip the fair youth Euphorbus
of his armour after he had slain him. Or as some fierce lion upon the
mountains in the pride of his strength fastens on the finest heifer in a
herd as it is feeding—first he breaks her neck with his strong jaws,
and then gorges on her blood and entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue
and cry against him, but they stand aloof and will not come close to him,
for they are pale with fear—even so no one had the courage to face
valiant Menelaus. The son of Atreus would have then carried off the armour
of the son of Panthous with ease, had not Phoebus Apollo been angry, and
in the guise of Mentes chief of the Cicons incited Hector to attack him.
“Hector,” said he, “you are now going after the horses of the noble son of
Aeacus, but you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven
by mortal man, save only by Achilles, who is son to an immortal mother.
Meanwhile Menelaus son of Atreus has bestridden the body of Patroclus and
killed the noblest of the Trojans, Euphorbus son of Panthous, so that he
can fight no more.”



The god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of Hector
was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks and saw
Euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from his wound,
and Menelaus stripping him of his armour. On this he made his way to the
front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour, and crying with a
loud voice. When the son of Atreus heard him, he said to himself in his
dismay, “Alas! what shall I do? I may not let the Trojans take the armour
of Patroclus who has fallen fighting on my behalf, lest some Danaan who
sees me should cry shame upon me. Still if for my honour’s sake I fight
Hector and the Trojans single-handed, they will prove too many for me, for
Hector is bringing them up in force. Why, however, should I thus hesitate?
When a man fights in despite of heaven with one whom a god befriends, he
will soon rue it. Let no Danaan think ill of me if I give place to Hector,
for the hand of heaven is with him. Yet, if I could find Ajax, the two of
us would fight Hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of
Patroclus for Achilles son of Peleus. This, of many evils would be the
least.”



While he was thus in two minds, the Trojans came up to him with Hector at
their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about like
some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a stockyard
with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks sulkily off—even
so did Menelaus son of Atreus turn and leave the body of Patroclus. When
among the body of his men, he looked around for mighty Ajax son of
Telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left of the fight, cheering
on his men and exhorting them to keep on fighting, for Phoebus Apollo had
spread a great panic among them. He ran up to him and said, “Ajax, my good
friend, come with me at once to dead Patroclus, if so be that we may take
the body to Achilles—as for his armour, Hector already has it.”



These words stirred the heart of Ajax, and he made his way among the front
ranks, Menelaus going with him. Hector had stripped Patroclus of his
armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the body to
fling before the dogs of Troy. But Ajax came up with his shield like wall
before him, on which Hector withdrew under shelter of his men, and sprang
on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the Trojans to take to the
city, as a great trophy for himself; Ajax, therefore, covered the body of
Patroclus with his broad shield and bestrode him; as a lion stands over
his whelps if hunters have come upon him in a forest when he is with his
little ones—in the pride and fierceness of his strength he draws his
knit brows down till they cover his eyes—even so did Ajax bestride
the body of Patroclus, and by his side stood Menelaus son of Atreus,
nursing great sorrow in his heart.



Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus looked fiercely at Hector and rebuked him
sternly. “Hector,” said he, “you make a brave show, but in fight you are
sadly wanting. A runaway like yourself has no claim to so great a
reputation. Think how you may now save your town and citadel by the hands
of your own people born in Ilius; for you will get no Lycians to fight for
you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant hardships. Are
you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less note, after leaving
Sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in arms, to be the spoil
and prey of the Danaans? So long as he lived he did good service both to
your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach to save his body from the
dogs. If the Lycians will listen to me, they will go home and leave Troy
to its fate. If the Trojans had any of that daring fearless spirit which
lays hold of men who are fighting for their country and harassing those
who would attack it, we should soon bear off Patroclus into Ilius. Could
we get this dead man away and bring him into the city of Priam, the
Argives would readily give up the armour of Sarpedon, and we should get
his body to boot. For he whose squire has been now killed is the foremost
man at the ships of the Achaeans—he and his close fighting
followers. Nevertheless you dared not make a stand against Ajax, nor face
him, eye to eye, with battle all round you, for he is a braver man than
you are.”



Hector scowled at him and answered, “Glaucus, you should know better. I
have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all Lycia,
but now I despise you for saying that I am afraid of Ajax. I fear neither
battle nor the din of chariots, but Jove’s will is stronger than ours;
Jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back and snatches victory
from his grasp, while at another he will set him on to fight. Come hither
then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed whether I shall play the
coward the whole day through as you say, or whether I shall not stay some
even of the boldest Danaans from fighting round the body of Patroclus.”



As he spoke he called loudly on the Trojans saying, “Trojans, Lycians, and
Dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight might
and main, while I put on the goodly armour of Achilles, which I took when
I killed Patroclus.”



With this Hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who were
taking the armour of Achilles to Troy, but had not yet got far. Standing
for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his armour. His own he
sent to the strong city of Ilius and to the Trojans, while he put on the
immortal armour of the son of Peleus, which the gods had given to Peleus,
who in his age gave it to his son; but the son did not grow old in his
father’s armour.



When Jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw Hector standing aloof and arming
himself in the armour of the son of Peleus, he wagged his head and
muttered to himself saying, “A! poor wretch, you arm in the armour of a
hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of the doom
that is already close upon you. You have killed his comrade so brave and
strong, but it was not well that you should strip the armour from his head
and shoulders. I do indeed endow you with great might now, but as against
this you shall not return from battle to lay the armour of the son of
Peleus before Andromache.”



The son of Saturn bowed his portentous brows, and Hector fitted the armour
to his body, while terrible Mars entered into him, and filled his whole
body with might and valour. With a shout he strode in among the allies,
and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all of them like the
great son of Peleus himself. He went about among them and cheered them on—Mesthles,
Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus, Asteropaeus, Deisenor and Hippothous,
Phorcys, Chromius and Ennomus the augur. All these did he exhort saying,
“Hear me, allies from other cities who are here in your thousands, it was
not in order to have a crowd about me that I called you hither each from
his several city, but that with heart and soul you might defend the wives
and little ones of the Trojans from the fierce Achaeans. For this do I
oppress my people with your food and the presents that make you rich.
Therefore turn, and charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the game of
war; whoever shall bring Patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of
the Trojans, and shall make Ajax give way before him, I will give him one
half of the spoils while I keep the other. He will thus share like honour
with myself.”



When he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the Danaans with
their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that he
should force Ajax son of Telamon to yield up the body—fools that
they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. Then Ajax said to
Menelaus, “My good friend Menelaus, you and I shall hardly come out of
this fight alive. I am less concerned for the body of Patroclus, who will
shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of Troy, than for the safety
of my own head and yours. Hector has wrapped us round in a storm of battle
from every quarter, and our destruction seems now certain. Call then upon
the princes of the Danaans if there is any who can hear us.”



Menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the Danaans for help at the top of
his voice. “My friends,” he cried, “princes and counsellors of the
Argives, all you who with Agamemnon and Menelaus drink at the public cost,
and give orders each to his own people as Jove vouchsafes him power and
glory, the fight is so thick about me that I cannot distinguish you
severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and think it shame that
Patroclus should become meat and morsel for Trojan hounds.”



Fleet Ajax son of Oileus heard him and was first to force his way through
the fight and run to help him. Next came Idomeneus and Meriones his
esquire, peer of murderous Mars. As for the others that came into the
fight after these, who of his own self could name them?



The Trojans with Hector at their head charged in a body. As a great wave
that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river, and the
rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers that beat
and buffet them—even with such a roar did the Trojans come on; but
the Achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son of Menoetius,
and fenced him with their bronze shields. Jove, moreover, hid the
brightness of their helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne no grudge
against the son of Menoetius while he was still alive and squire to the
descendant of Aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him fall a prey to the
dogs of his foes the Trojans, and urged his comrades on to defend him.



At first the Trojans drove the Achaeans back, and they withdrew from the
dead man daunted. The Trojans did not succeed in killing any one,
nevertheless they drew the body away. But the Achaeans did not lose it
long, for Ajax, foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus alike
in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the front
like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the forest
glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked him—even
so did Ajax son of Telamon passing easily in among the phalanxes of the
Trojans, disperse those who had bestridden Patroclus and were most bent on
winning glory by dragging him off to their city. At this moment Hippothous
brave son of the Pelasgian Lethus, in his zeal for Hector and the Trojans,
was dragging the body off by the foot through the press of the fight,
having bound a strap round the sinews near the ancle; but a mischief soon
befell him from which none of those could save him who would have gladly
done so, for the son of Telamon sprang forward and smote him on his
bronze-cheeked helmet. The plumed headpiece broke about the point of the
weapon, struck at once by the spear and by the strong hand of Ajax, so
that the bloody brain came oozing out through the crest-socket. His
strength then failed him and he let Patroclus’ foot drop from his hand, as
he fell full length dead upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile
land of Larissa, and never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up,
for his life was cut short early by the spear of mighty Ajax. Hector then
took aim at Ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just managed to
avoid it; the spear passed on and struck Schedius son of noble Iphitus,
captain of the Phoceans, who dwelt in famed Panopeus and reigned over much
people; it struck him under the middle of the collar-bone the bronze point
went right through him, coming out at the bottom of his shoulder-blade,
and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Ajax in his turn struck noble Phorcys son of Phaenops in the middle of the
belly as he was bestriding Hippothous, and broke the plate of his cuirass;
whereon the spear tore out his entrails and he clutched the ground in his
palm as he fell to earth. Hector and those who were in the front rank then
gave ground, while the Argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off
the bodies of Phorcys and Hippothous which they stripped presently of
their armour.



The Trojans would now have been worsted by the brave Achaeans and driven
back to Ilius through their own cowardice, while the Argives, so great was
their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph even against
the will of Jove, if Apollo had not roused Aeneas, in the likeness of
Periphas son of Epytus, an attendant who had grown old in the service of
Aeneas’ aged father, and was at all times devoted to him. In his likeness,
then, Apollo said, “Aeneas, can you not manage, even though heaven be
against us, to save high Ilius? I have known men, whose numbers, courage,
and self-reliance have saved their people in spite of Jove, whereas in
this case he would much rather give victory to us than to the Danaans, if
you would only fight instead of being so terribly afraid.”



Aeneas knew Apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to Hector
saying, “Hector and all other Trojans and allies, shame on us if we are
beaten by the Achaeans and driven back to Ilius through our own cowardice.
A god has just come up to me and told me that Jove the supreme disposer
will be with us. Therefore let us make for the Danaans, that it may go
hard with them ere they bear away dead Patroclus to the ships.”



As he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied and
again faced the Achaeans. Aeneas speared Leiocritus son of Arisbas, a
valiant follower of Lycomedes, and Lycomedes was moved with pity as he saw
him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared Apisaon son of Hippasus
shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff, so that he died; he
had come from fertile Paeonia and was the best man of them all after
Asteropaeus. Asteropaeus flew forward to avenge him and attack the
Danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those about Patroclus
were well covered by their shields, and held their spears in front of
them, for Ajax had given them strict orders that no man was either to give
ground, or to stand out before the others, but all were to hold well
together about the body and fight hand to hand. Thus did huge Ajax bid
them, and the earth ran red with blood as the corpses fell thick on one
another alike on the side of the Trojans and allies, and on that of the
Danaans; for these last, too, fought no bloodless fight though many fewer
of them perished, through the care they took to defend and stand by one
another.



Thus did they fight as it were a flaming fire; it seemed as though it had
gone hard even with the sun and moon, for they were hidden over all that
part where the bravest heroes were fighting about the dead son of
Menoetius, whereas the other Danaans and Achaeans fought at their ease in
full daylight with brilliant sunshine all round them, and there was not a
cloud to be seen neither on plain nor mountain. These last moreover would
rest for a while and leave off fighting, for they were some distance apart
and beyond the range of one another’s weapons, whereas those who were in
the thick of the fray suffered both from battle and darkness. All the best
of them were being worn out by the great weight of their armour, but the
two valiant heroes, Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet heard of the
death of Patroclus, and believed him to be still alive and leading the van
against the Trojans; they were keeping themselves in reserve against the
death or rout of their own comrades, for so Nestor had ordered when he
sent them from the ships into battle.



Thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat of
their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands and
eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of Peleus. It was as
when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to his men, and bids
them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in a ring and tug till the
moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for the many that pull at it, and
it is well stretched—even so did the two sides tug the dead body
hither and thither within the compass of but a little space—the
Trojans steadfastly set on dragging it into Ilius, while the Achaeans were
no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was the fight between
them. Not Mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet Minerva, even in their
fullest fury could make light of such a battle.



Such fearful turmoil of men and horses did Jove on that day ordain round
the body of Patroclus. Meanwhile Achilles did not know that he had fallen,
for the fight was under the wall of Troy a long way off the ships. He had
no idea, therefore, that Patroclus was dead, and deemed that he would
return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the gates. He knew that he
was not to sack the city neither with nor without himself, for his mother
had often told him this when he had sat alone with her, and she had
informed him of the counsels of great Jove. Now, however, she had not told
him how great a disaster had befallen him in the death of the one who was
far dearest to him of all his comrades.



The others still kept on charging one another round the body with their
pointed spears and killing each other. Then would one say, “My friends, we
can never again show our faces at the ships—better, and greatly
better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this place, than
that we should let the Trojans have the triumph of bearing off Patroclus
to their city.”



The Trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, “Friends,
though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from fighting.”
With such words did they exhort each other. They fought and fought, and an
iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault of heaven. The
horses of the descendant of Aeacus stood out of the fight and wept when
they heard that their driver had been laid low by the hand of murderous
Hector. Automedon, valiant son of Diores, lashed them again and again;
many a time did he speak kindly to them, and many a time did he upbraid
them, but they would neither go back to the ships by the waters of the
broad Hellespont, nor yet into battle among the Achaeans; they stood with
their chariot stock still, as a pillar set over the tomb of some dead man
or woman, and bowed their heads to the ground. Hot tears fell from their
eyes as they mourned the loss of their charioteer, and their noble manes
drooped all wet from under the yoke-straps on either side the yoke.



The son of Saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. He wagged his
head, and muttered to himself, saying, “Poor things, why did we give you
to King Peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves ageless and
immortal? Was it that you might share the sorrows that befall mankind? for
of all creatures that live and move upon the earth there is none so
pitiable as he is—still, Hector son of Priam shall drive neither you
nor your chariot. I will not have it. It is enough that he should have the
armour over which he vaunts so vainly. Furthermore I will give you
strength of heart and limb to bear Automedon safely to the ships from
battle, for I shall let the Trojans triumph still further, and go on
killing till they reach the ships; whereon night shall fall and darkness
overshadow the land.”



As he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that they
shook the dust from out of their manes, and bore their chariot swiftly
into the fight that raged between Trojans and Achaeans. Behind them fought
Automedon full of sorrow for his comrade, as a vulture amid a flock of
geese. In and out, and here and there, full speed he dashed amid the
throng of the Trojans, but for all the fury of his pursuit he killed no
man, for he could not wield his spear and keep his horses in hand when
alone in the chariot; at last, however, a comrade, Alcimedon, son of
Laerces son of Haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his chariot.
“Automedon,” said he, “what god has put this folly into your heart and
robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the Trojans in the front
rank single-handed? He who was your comrade is slain, and Hector plumes
himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of Aeacus.”



Automedon son of Diores answered, “Alcimedon, there is no one else who can
control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only
Patroclus—while he was alive—peer of gods in counsel. Take
then the whip and reins, while I go down from the car and fight.”



Alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins,
while Automedon leaped from off the car. When Hector saw him he said to
Aeneas who was near him, “Aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad Trojans, I
see the steeds of the fleet son of Aeacus come into battle with weak hands
to drive them. I am sure, if you think well, that we might take them; they
will not dare face us if we both attack them.”



The valiant son of Anchises was of the same mind, and the pair went right
on, with their shoulders covered under shields of tough dry ox-hide,
overlaid with much bronze. Chromius and Aretus went also with them, and
their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill the men and capture
the horses—fools that they were, for they were not to return
scatheless from their meeting with Automedon, who prayed to father Jove
and was forthwith filled with courage and strength abounding. He turned to
his trusty comrade Alcimedon and said, “Alcimedon, keep your horses so
close up that I may feel their breath upon my back; I doubt that we shall
not stay Hector son of Priam till he has killed us and mounted behind the
horses; he will then either spread panic among the ranks of the Achaeans,
or himself be killed among the foremost.”



On this he cried out to the two Ajaxes and Menelaus, “Ajaxes captains of
the Argives, and Menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are best
able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for Hector and
Aeneas who are the two best men among the Trojans, are pressing us hard in
the full tide of war. Nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of heaven, I
will therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to Jove.”



He poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round
shield of Aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed it not,
so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part of his belly.
As when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow behind the horns of
an ox and severs the tendons at the back of its neck so that it springs
forward and then drops, even so did Aretus give one bound and then fall on
his back the spear quivering in his body till it made an end of him.
Hector then aimed a spear at Automedon but he saw it coming and stooped
forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and the point stuck in the
ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Mars robbed it of its
force. They would then have fought hand to hand with swords had not the
two Ajaxes forced their way through the crowd when they heard their
comrade calling, and parted them for all their fury—for Hector,
Aeneas, and Chromius were afraid and drew back, leaving Aretus to lie
there struck to the heart. Automedon, peer of fleet Mars, then stripped
him of his armour and vaunted over him saying, “I have done little to
assuage my sorrow for the son of Menoetius, for the man I have killed is
not so good as he was.”



As he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his
chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped in
gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull.



And now the fierce groanful fight again raged about Patroclus, for Minerva
came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of far-seeing
Jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the Danaans. As
when Jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to mankind either of war
or of the chill storms that stay men from their labour and plague the
flocks—even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment, did Minerva go in
among the host and speak man by man to each. First she took the form and
voice of Phoenix and spoke to Menelaus son of Atreus, who was standing
near her. “Menelaus,” said she, “it will be shame and dishonour to you, if
dogs tear the noble comrade of Achilles under the walls of Troy. Therefore
be staunch, and urge your men to be so also.”



Menelaus answered, “Phoenix, my good old friend, may Minerva vouchsafe me
strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall I stand by Patroclus
and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but Hector is as a raging
fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for Jove is now granting him a
time of triumph.”



Minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other
gods. Therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made
him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and
bite if it can, so dearly does it love man’s blood—even so bold as
this did she make him as he stood over Patroclus and threw his spear. Now
there was among the Trojans a man named Podes, son of Eetion, who was both
rich and valiant. Hector held him in the highest honour for he was his
comrade and boon companion; the spear of Menelaus struck this man in the
girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right through him.
Whereon he fell heavily forward, and Menelaus son of Atreus drew off his
body from the Trojans into the ranks of his own people.



Apollo then went up to Hector and spurred him on to fight, in the likeness
of Phaenops son of Asius who lived in Abydos and was the most favoured of
all Hector’s guests. In his likeness Apollo said, “Hector, who of the
Achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have quailed before
Menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier? Yet he has now got a
corpse away from the Trojans single-handed, and has slain your own true
comrade, a man brave among the foremost, Podes son of Eetion.”



A dark cloud of grief fell upon Hector as he heard, and he made his way to
the front clad in full armour. Thereon the son of Saturn seized his bright
tasselled aegis, and veiled Ida in cloud: he sent forth his lightnings and
his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory to the Trojans and
routed the Achaeans.



The panic was begun by Peneleos the Boeotian, for while keeping his face
turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the upper part
of the shoulder; a spear thrown by Polydamas had grazed the top of the
bone, for Polydamas had come up to him and struck him from close at hand.
Then Hector in close combat struck Leitus son of noble Alectryon in the
hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting further. He looked about
him in dismay, knowing that never again should he wield spear in battle
with the Trojans. While Hector was in pursuit of Leitus, Idomeneus struck
him on the breastplate over his chest near the nipple; but the spear broke
in the shaft, and the Trojans cheered aloud. Hector then aimed at
Idomeneus son of Deucalion as he was standing on his chariot, and very
narrowly missed him, but the spear hit Coiranus, a follower and charioteer
of Meriones who had come with him from Lyctus. Idomeneus had left the
ships on foot and would have afforded a great triumph to the Trojans if
Coiranus had not driven quickly up to him, he therefore brought life and
rescue to Idomeneus, but himself fell by the hand of murderous Hector. For
Hector hit him on the jaw under the ear; the end of the spear drove out
his teeth and cut his tongue in two pieces, so that he fell from his
chariot and let the reins fall to the ground. Meriones gathered them up
from the ground and took them into his own hands, then he said to
Idomeneus, “Lay on, till you get back to the ships, for you must see that
the day is no longer ours.”



On this Idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken hold
upon him.



Ajax and Menelaus noted how Jove had turned the scale in favour of the
Trojans, and Ajax was first to speak. “Alas,” said he, “even a fool may
see that father Jove is helping the Trojans. All their weapons strike
home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them,
Jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without effect.
What, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and our return
to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look hitherwards;
for they will make sure that nothing can now check the terrible hands of
Hector, and that he will fling himself upon our ships. I wish that some
one would go and tell the son of Peleus at once, for I do not think he can
have yet heard the sad news that the dearest of his friends has fallen.
But I can see not a man among the Achaeans to send, for they and their
chariots are alike hidden in darkness. O father Jove, lift this cloud from
over the sons of the Achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you
will that we perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight.”



Father Jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. Forthwith he
chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all the
fighting was revealed. Ajax then said to Menelaus, “Look, Menelaus, and if
Antilochus son of Nestor be still living, send him at once to tell
Achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has fallen.”



Menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a stockyard—the
lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep watch the whole
night through and will not let him feast on the fat of their herd. In his
lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain, for darts from strong
hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt him for all his hunger,
so in the morning he slinks sulkily away—even so did Menelaus sorely
against his will leave Patroclus, in great fear lest the Achaeans should
be driven back in rout and let him fall into the hands of the foe. He
charged Meriones and the two Ajaxes straitly saying, “Ajaxes and Meriones,
leaders of the Argives, now indeed remember how good Patroclus was; he was
ever courteous while alive, bear it in mind now that he is dead.”



With this Menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle,
whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird—however
high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him by
crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it and make
an end of it—even so, O Menelaus, did your keen eyes range round the
mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of Nestor
still alive. Presently Menelaus saw him on the extreme left of the battle
cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly. Menelaus went up
to him and said, “Antilochus, come here and listen to sad news, which I
would indeed were untrue. You must see with your own eyes that heaven is
heaping calamity upon the Danaans, and giving victory to the Trojans.
Patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of the Achaeans, and sorely will
the Danaans miss him. Run instantly to the ships and tell Achilles, that
he may come to rescue the body and bear it to the ships. As for the
armour, Hector already has it.”



Antilochus was struck with horror. For a long time he was speechless; his
eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did as
Menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his armour
to a comrade, Laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close beside
him.



Thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to
Achilles son of Peleus. Nor were you, O Menelaus, minded to succour his
harassed comrades, when Antilochus had left the Pylians—and greatly
did they miss him—but he sent them noble Thrasymedes, and himself
went back to Patroclus. He came running up to the two Ajaxes and said, “I
have sent Antilochus to the ships to tell Achilles, but rage against
Hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour. What
then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and our own
escape from death amid the battle-cries of the Trojans?”



Ajax answered, “Menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and Meriones
stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while we two
behind you keep off Hector and the Trojans, one in heart as in name, and
long used to fighting side by side with one another.”



On this Menelaus and Meriones took the dead man in their arms and lifted
him high aloft with a great effort. The Trojan host raised a hue and cry
behind them when they saw the Achaeans bearing the body away, and flew
after them like hounds attacking a wounded boar at the loo of a band of
young huntsmen. For a while the hounds fly at him as though they would
tear him in pieces, but now and again he turns on them in a fury, scaring
and scattering them in all directions—even so did the Trojans for a
while charge in a body, striking with sword and with spears pointed at
both the ends, but when the two Ajaxes faced them and stood at bay, they
would turn pale and no man dared press on to fight further about the dead.



In this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the body to the
ships out of the fight. The battle raged round them like fierce flames
that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and the houses
fall in the glare of its burning—even such was the roar and tramp of
men and horses that pursued them as they bore Patroclus from the field. Or
as mules that put forth all their strength to draw some beam or great
piece of ship’s timber down a rough mountain-track, and they pant and
sweat as they go—even so did Menelaus and Meriones pant and sweat as they
bore the body of Patroclus. Behind them the two Ajaxes held stoutly out.
As some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain will turn water
and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there any stream strong
enough to break through it—even so did the two Ajaxes face the
Trojans and stem the tide of their fighting though they kept pouring on
towards them and foremost among them all was Aeneas son of Anchises with
valiant Hector. As a flock of daws or starlings fall to screaming and
chattering when they see a falcon, foe to all small birds, come soaring
near them, even so did the Achaean youth raise a babel of cries as they
fled before Aeneas and Hector, unmindful of their former prowess. In the
rout of the Danaans much goodly armour fell round about the trench, and of
fighting there was no end.

=== ILIAD BOOK 18 ===

The grief of Achilles over Patroclus—The visit of Thetis to Vulcan
and the armour that he made for Achilles.



Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the fleet
runner Antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached Achilles, and
found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was indeed too
surely true. “Alas,” said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart,
“why are the Achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking towards the
ships? Heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that sorrow upon me of
which my mother Thetis spoke, saying that while I was yet alive the
bravest of the Myrmidons should fall before the Trojans, and see the light
of the sun no longer. I fear the brave son of Menoetius has fallen through
his own daring and yet I bade him return to the ships as soon as he had
driven back those that were bringing fire against them, and not join
battle with Hector.”



As he was thus pondering, the son of Nestor came up to him and told his
sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. “Alas,” he cried, “son of noble
Peleus, I bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue.
Patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body—for
Hector holds his armour.”



A dark cloud of grief fell upon Achilles as he listened. He filled both
hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head,
disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his shirt
so fair and new. He flung himself down all huge and hugely at full length,
and tore his hair with his hands. The bondswomen whom Achilles and
Patroclus had taken captive screamed aloud for grief, beating their
breasts, and with their limbs failing them for sorrow. Antilochus bent
over him the while, weeping and holding both his hands as he lay groaning
for he feared that he might plunge a knife into his own throat. Then
Achilles gave a loud cry and his mother heard him as she was sitting in
the depths of the sea by the old man her father, whereon she screamed, and
all the goddesses daughters of Nereus that dwelt at the bottom of the sea,
came gathering round her. There were Glauce, Thalia and Cymodoce, Nesaia,
Speo, Thoe and dark-eyed Halie, Cymothoe, Actaea and Limnorea, Melite,
Iaera, Amphithoe and Agave, Doto and Proto, Pherusa and Dynamene,
Dexamene, Amphinome and Callianeira, Doris, Panope, and the famous
sea-nymph Galatea, Nemertes, Apseudes and Callianassa. There were also
Clymene, Ianeira and Ianassa, Maera, Oreithuia and Amatheia of the lovely
locks, with other Nereids who dwell in the depths of the sea. The crystal
cave was filled with their multitude and they all beat their breasts while
Thetis led them in their lament.



“Listen,” she cried, “sisters, daughters of Nereus, that you may hear the
burden of my sorrows. Alas, woe is me, woe in that I have borne the most
glorious of offspring. I bore him fair and strong, hero among heroes, and
he shot up as a sapling; I tended him as a plant in a goodly garden, and
sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the Trojans, but never shall I
welcome him back to the house of Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon
the light of the sun he is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot
help him. Nevertheless I will go, that I may see my dear son and learn
what sorrow has befallen him though he is still holding aloof from
battle.”



She left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping after,
and the waves opened a path before them. When they reached the rich plain
of Troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line on to the sands, at
the place where the ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up in close order
round the tents of Achilles. His mother went up to him as he lay groaning;
she laid her hand upon his head and spoke piteously, saying, “My son, why
are you thus weeping? What sorrow has now befallen you? Tell me; hide it
not from me. Surely Jove has granted you the prayer you made him, when you
lifted up your hands and besought him that the Achaeans might all of them
be pent up at their ships, and rue it bitterly in that you were no longer
with them.”



Achilles groaned and answered, “Mother, Olympian Jove has indeed
vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me, seeing
that my dear comrade Patroclus has fallen—he whom I valued more than
all others, and loved as dearly as my own life? I have lost him; aye, and
Hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so glorious to
behold, which the gods gave to Peleus when they laid you in the couch of a
mortal man. Would that you were still dwelling among the immortal
sea-nymphs, and that Peleus had taken to himself some mortal bride. For
now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of that son whom
you can never welcome home—nay, I will not live nor go about among
mankind unless Hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for having slain
Patroclus son of Menoetius.”



Thetis wept and answered, “Then, my son, is your end near at hand—for
your own death awaits you full soon after that of Hector.”



Then said Achilles in his great grief, “I would die here and now, in that
I could not save my comrade. He has fallen far from home, and in his hour
of need my hand was not there to help him. What is there for me? Return to
my own land I shall not, and I have brought no saving neither to Patroclus
nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been slain by mighty Hector;
I stay here by my ships a bootless burden upon the earth, I, who in fight
have no peer among the Achaeans, though in council there are better than
I. Therefore, perish strife both from among gods and men, and anger,
wherein even a righteous man will harden his heart—which rises up in
the soul of a man like smoke, and the taste thereof is sweeter than drops
of honey. Even so has Agamemnon angered me. And yet—so be it, for it
is over; I will force my soul into subjection as I needs must; I will go;
I will pursue Hector who has slain him whom I loved so dearly, and will
then abide my doom when it may please Jove and the other gods to send it.
Even Hercules, the best beloved of Jove—even he could not escape the
hand of death, but fate and Juno’s fierce anger laid him low, as I too
shall lie when I am dead if a like doom awaits me. Till then I will win
fame, and will bid Trojan and Dardanian women wring tears from their
tender cheeks with both their hands in the grievousness of their great
sorrow; thus shall they know that he who has held aloof so long will hold
aloof no longer. Hold me not back, therefore, in the love you bear me, for
you shall not move me.”



Then silver-footed Thetis answered, “My son, what you have said is true.
It is well to save your comrades from destruction, but your armour is in
the hands of the Trojans; Hector bears it in triumph upon his own
shoulders. Full well I know that his vaunt shall not be lasting, for his
end is close at hand; go not, however, into the press of battle till you
see me return hither; to-morrow at break of day I shall be here, and will
bring you goodly armour from King Vulcan.”



On this she left her brave son, and as she turned away she said to the
sea-nymphs her sisters, “Dive into the bosom of the sea and go to the
house of the old sea-god my father. Tell him everything; as for me, I will
go to the cunning workman Vulcan on high Olympus, and ask him to provide
my son with a suit of splendid armour.”



When she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while
silver-footed Thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for her
son.



Thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to Olympus, and meanwhile the
Achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous Hector till they
reached the ships and the Hellespont, and they could not draw the body of
Mars’s servant Patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were showered
upon him, for Hector son of Priam with his host and horsemen had again
caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice did brave
Hector seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to draw him
away and calling loudly on the Trojans, and thrice did the two Ajaxes,
clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the body; but all
undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the fight, and now again
he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would give no ground. As upland
shepherds that cannot chase some famished lion from a carcase, even so
could not the two Ajaxes scare Hector son of Priam from the body of
Patroclus.



And now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable glory,
had not Iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from Olympus
to the son of Peleus and bidden him arm. She came secretly without the
knowledge of Jove and of the other gods, for Juno sent her, and when she
had got close to him she said, “Up, son of Peleus, mightiest of all
mankind; rescue Patroclus about whom this fearful fight is now raging by
the ships. Men are killing one another, the Danaans in defence of the dead
body, while the Trojans are trying to hale it away, and take it to windy
Ilius: Hector is the most furious of them all; he is for cutting the head
from the body and fixing it on the stakes of the wall. Up, then, and bide
here no longer; shrink from the thought that Patroclus may become meat for
the dogs of Troy. Shame on you, should his body suffer any kind of
outrage.”



And Achilles said, “Iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?”



Iris answered, “It was Juno the royal spouse of Jove, but the son of
Saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the immortals
who dwell on the snowy summits of Olympus.”



Then fleet Achilles answered her saying, “How can I go up into the battle?
They have my armour. My mother forbade me to arm till I should see her
come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from Vulcan; I know no
man whose arms I can put on, save only the shield of Ajax son of Telamon,
and he surely must be fighting in the front rank and wielding his spear
about the body of dead Patroclus.”



Iris said, “We know that your armour has been taken, but go as you are; go
to the deep trench and show yourself before the Trojans, that they may
fear you and cease fighting. Thus will the fainting sons of the Achaeans
gain some brief breathing time, which in battle may hardly be.”



Iris left him when she had so spoken. But Achilles dear to Jove arose, and
Minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders; she crowned
his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled a glow of
gleaming fire. As the smoke that goes up into heaven from some city that
is being beleaguered on an island far out at sea—all day long do men
sally from the city and fight their hardest, and at the going down of the
sun the line of beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring high for those that
dwell near them to behold, if so be that they may come with their ships
and succour them—even so did the light flare from the head of
Achilles, as he stood by the trench, going beyond the wall—but he
did not join the Achaeans for he heeded the charge which his mother laid
upon him.



There did he stand and shout aloud. Minerva also raised her voice from
afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the Trojans. Ringing as the note
of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe is at the gates of a city,
even so brazen was the voice of the son of Aeacus, and when the Trojans
heard its clarion tones they were dismayed; the horses turned back with
their chariots for they boded mischief, and their drivers were awe-struck
by the steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had kindled above the head
of the great son of Peleus.



Thrice did Achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench, and
thrice were the Trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion;
whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels of their
chariots and perished by their own spears. The Achaeans to their great joy
then drew Patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and laid him on a litter:
his comrades stood mourning round him, and among them fleet Achilles who
wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead upon his bier. He had
sent him out with horses and chariots into battle, but his return he was
not to welcome.



Then Juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of
Oceanus; so he set, and the Achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil of
war.



Now the Trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their horses
and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. They kept their
feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen upon them all
because Achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so long from
battle. Polydamas son of Panthous was first to speak, a man of judgement,
who alone among them could look both before and after. He was comrade to
Hector, and they had been born upon the same night; with all sincerity and
goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:—



“Look to it well, my friends; I would urge you to go back now to your city
and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from our
walls. So long as this man was at enmity with Agamemnon the Achaeans were
easier to deal with, and I would have gladly camped by the ships in the
hope of taking them; but now I go in great fear of the fleet son of
Peleus; he is so daring that he will never bide here on the plain whereon
the Trojans and Achaeans fight with equal valour, but he will try to storm
our city and carry off our women. Do then as I say, and let us retreat.
For this is what will happen. The darkness of night will for a time stay
the son of Peleus, but if he find us here in the morning when he sallies
forth in full armour, we shall have knowledge of him in good earnest. Glad
indeed will he be who can escape and get back to Ilius, and many a Trojan
will become meat for dogs and vultures may I never live to hear it. If we
do as I say, little though we may like it, we shall have strength in
counsel during the night, and the great gates with the doors that close
them will protect the city. At dawn we can arm and take our stand on the
walls; he will then rue it if he sallies from the ships to fight us. He
will go back when he has given his horses their fill of being driven all
whithers under our walls, and will be in no mind to try and force his way
into the city. Neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he
do so.”



Hector looked fiercely at him and answered, “Polydamas, your words are not
to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within the city. Have
you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls? In the old-days the
city of Priam was famous the whole world over for its wealth of gold and
bronze, but our treasures are wasted out of our houses, and much goods
have been sold away to Phrygia and fair Meonia, for the hand of Jove has
been laid heavily upon us. Now, therefore, that the son of scheming Saturn
has vouchsafed me to win glory here and to hem the Achaeans in at their
ships, prate no more in this fool’s wise among the people. You will have
no man with you; it shall not be; do all of you as I now say;—take
your suppers in your companies throughout the host, and keep your watches
and be wakeful every man of you. If any Trojan is uneasy about his
possessions, let him gather them and give them out among the people.
Better let these, rather than the Achaeans, have them. At daybreak we will
arm and fight about the ships; granted that Achilles has again come
forward to defend them, let it be as he will, but it shall go hard with
him. I shall not shun him, but will fight him, to fall or conquer. The god
of war deals out like measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain.”



Thus spoke Hector; and the Trojans, fools that they were, shouted in
applause, for Pallas Minerva had robbed them of their understanding. They
gave ear to Hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of Polydamas
no man would heed. They took their supper throughout the host, and
meanwhile through the whole night the Achaeans mourned Patroclus, and the
son of Peleus led them in their lament. He laid his murderous hands upon
the breast of his comrade, groaning again and again as a bearded lion when
a man who was chasing deer has robbed him of his young in some dense
forest; when the lion comes back he is furious, and searches dingle and
dell to track the hunter if he can find him, for he is mad with rage—even
so with many a sigh did Achilles speak among the Myrmidons saying, “Alas!
vain were the words with which I cheered the hero Menoetius in his own
house; I said that I would bring his brave son back again to Opoeis after
he had sacked Ilius and taken his share of the spoils—but Jove does
not give all men their heart’s desire. The same soil shall be reddened
here at Troy by the blood of us both, for I too shall never be welcomed
home by the old knight Peleus, nor by my mother Thetis, but even in this
place shall the earth cover me. Nevertheless, O Patroclus, now that I am
left behind you, I will not bury you, till I have brought hither the head
and armour of mighty Hector who has slain you. Twelve noble sons of
Trojans will I behead before your bier to avenge you; till I have done so
you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of Troy and
Dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we sacked
men’s goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day.”



Then Achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire that they
might wash the clotted gore from off Patroclus. Thereon they set a tripod
full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks on to it to make
it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about the belly of
the tripod. When the water in the cauldron was boiling they washed the
body, anointed it with oil, and closed its wounds with ointment that had
been kept nine years. Then they laid it on a bier and covered it with a
linen cloth from head to foot, and over this they laid a fair white robe.
Thus all night long did the Myrmidons gather round Achilles to mourn
Patroclus.



Then Jove said to Juno his sister-wife, “So, Queen Juno, you have gained
your end, and have roused fleet Achilles. One would think that the
Achaeans were of your own flesh and blood.”



And Juno answered, “Dread son of Saturn, why should you say this thing?
May not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do what
he can for another person? And shall not I—foremost of all goddesses
both by descent and as wife to you who reign in heaven—devise evil
for the Trojans if I am angry with them?”



Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Thetis came to the house of Vulcan,
imperishable, star-bespangled, fairest of the abodes in heaven, a house of
bronze wrought by the lame god’s own hands. She found him busy with his
bellows, sweating and hard at work, for he was making twenty tripods that
were to stand by the wall of his house, and he set wheels of gold under
them all that they might go of their own selves to the assemblies of the
gods, and come back again—marvels indeed to see. They were finished
all but the ears of cunning workmanship which yet remained to be fixed to
them: these he was now fixing, and he was hammering at the rivets. While
he was thus at work silver-footed Thetis came to the house. Charis, of
graceful head-dress, wife to the far-famed lame god, came towards her as
soon as she saw her, and took her hand in her own, saying, “Why have you
come to our house, Thetis, honoured and ever welcome—for you do not
visit us often? Come inside and let me set refreshment before you.”



The goddess led the way as she spoke, and bade Thetis sit on a richly
decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under her
feet. Then she called Vulcan and said, “Vulcan, come here, Thetis wants
you”; and the far-famed lame god answered, “Then it is indeed an august
and honoured goddess who has come here; she it was that took care of me
when I was suffering from the heavy fall which I had through my cruel
mother’s anger—for she would have got rid of me because I was lame.
It would have gone hardly with me had not Eurynome, daughter of the
ever-encircling waters of Oceanus, and Thetis, taken me to their bosom.
Nine years did I stay with them, and many beautiful works in bronze,
brooches, spiral armlets, cups, and chains, did I make for them in their
cave, with the roaring waters of Oceanus foaming as they rushed ever past
it; and no one knew, neither of gods nor men, save only Thetis and
Eurynome who took care of me. If, then, Thetis has come to my house I must
make her due requital for having saved me; entertain her, therefore, with
all hospitality, while I put by my bellows and all my tools.”



On this the mighty monster hobbled off from his anvil, his thin legs
plying lustily under him. He set the bellows away from the fire, and
gathered his tools into a silver chest. Then he took a sponge and washed
his face and hands, his shaggy chest and brawny neck; he donned his shirt,
grasped his strong staff, and limped towards the door. There were golden
handmaids also who worked for him, and were like real young women, with
sense and reason, voice also and strength, and all the learning of the
immortals; these busied themselves as the king bade them, while he drew
near to Thetis, seated her upon a goodly seat, and took her hand in his
own, saying, “Why have you come to our house, Thetis honoured and ever
welcome—for you do not visit us often? Say what you want, and I will
do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be done at all.”



Thetis wept and answered, “Vulcan, is there another goddess in Olympus
whom the son of Saturn has been pleased to try with so much affliction as
he has me? Me alone of the marine goddesses did he make subject to a
mortal husband, Peleus son of Aeacus, and sorely against my will did I
submit to the embraces of one who was but mortal, and who now stays at
home worn out with age. Neither is this all. Heaven vouchsafed me a son,
hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. I tended him as a plant in
a goodly garden and sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the Trojans,
but never shall I welcome him back to the house of Peleus. So long as he
lives to look upon the light of the sun, he is in heaviness, and though I
go to him I cannot help him; King Agamemnon has made him give up the
maiden whom the sons of the Achaeans had awarded him, and he wastes with
sorrow for her sake. Then the Trojans hemmed the Achaeans in at their
ships’ sterns and would not let them come forth; the elders, therefore, of
the Argives besought Achilles and offered him great treasure, whereon he
refused to bring deliverance to them himself, but put his own armour on
Patroclus and sent him into the fight with much people after him. All day
long they fought by the Scaean gates and would have taken the city there
and then, had not Apollo vouchsafed glory to Hector and slain the valiant
son of Menoetius after he had done the Trojans much evil. Therefore I am
suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son,
whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves
fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own when
his true comrade fell at the hands of the Trojans, and he now lies
stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul.”



And Vulcan answered, “Take heart, and be no more disquieted about this
matter; would that I could hide him from death’s sight when his hour is
come, so surely as I can find him armour that shall amaze the eyes of all
who behold it.”



When he had so said he left her and went to his bellows, turning them
towards the fire and bidding them do their office. Twenty bellows blew
upon the melting-pots, and they blew blasts of every kind, some fierce to
help him when he had need of them, and others less strong as Vulcan willed
it in the course of his work. He threw tough copper into the fire, and
tin, with silver and gold; he set his great anvil on its block, and with
one hand grasped his mighty hammer while he took the tongs in the other.



First he shaped the shield so great and strong, adorning it all over and
binding it round with a gleaming circuit in three layers; and the baldric
was made of silver. He made the shield in five thicknesses, and with many
a wonder did his cunning hand enrich it.



He wrought the earth, the heavens, and the sea; the moon also at her full
and the untiring sun, with all the signs that glorify the face of heaven—the
Pleiads, the Hyads, huge Orion, and the Bear, which men also call the Wain
and which turns round ever in one place, facing Orion, and alone never
dips into the stream of Oceanus.



He wrought also two cities, fair to see and busy with the hum of men. In
the one were weddings and wedding-feasts, and they were going about the
city with brides whom they were escorting by torchlight from their
chambers. Loud rose the cry of Hymen, and the youths danced to the music
of flute and lyre, while the women stood each at her house door to see
them.



Meanwhile the people were gathered in assembly, for there was a quarrel,
and two men were wrangling about the blood-money for a man who had been
killed, the one saying before the people that he had paid damages in full,
and the other that he had not been paid. Each was trying to make his own
case good, and the people took sides, each man backing the side that he
had taken; but the heralds kept them back, and the elders sate on their
seats of stone in a solemn circle, holding the staves which the heralds
had put into their hands. Then they rose and each in his turn gave
judgement, and there were two talents laid down, to be given to him whose
judgement should be deemed the fairest.



About the other city there lay encamped two hosts in gleaming armour, and
they were divided whether to sack it, or to spare it and accept the half
of what it contained. But the men of the city would not yet consent, and
armed themselves for a surprise; their wives and little children kept
guard upon the walls, and with them were the men who were past fighting
through age; but the others sallied forth with Mars and Pallas Minerva at
their head—both of them wrought in gold and clad in golden raiment,
great and fair with their armour as befitting gods, while they that
followed were smaller. When they reached the place where they would lay
their ambush, it was on a riverbed to which live stock of all kinds would
come from far and near to water; here, then, they lay concealed, clad in
full armour. Some way off them there were two scouts who were on the
look-out for the coming of sheep or cattle, which presently came, followed
by two shepherds who were playing on their pipes, and had not so much as a
thought of danger. When those who were in ambush saw this, they cut off
the flocks and herds and killed the shepherds. Meanwhile the besiegers,
when they heard much noise among the cattle as they sat in council, sprang
to their horses, and made with all speed towards them; when they reached
them they set battle in array by the banks of the river, and the hosts
aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another. With them were Strife and
Riot, and fell Fate who was dragging three men after her, one with a fresh
wound, and the other unwounded, while the third was dead, and she was
dragging him along by his heel: and her robe was bedrabbled in men’s
blood. They went in and out with one another and fought as though they
were living people haling away one another’s dead.



He wrought also a fair fallow field, large and thrice ploughed already.
Many men were working at the plough within it, turning their oxen to and
fro, furrow after furrow. Each time that they turned on reaching the
headland a man would come up to them and give them a cup of wine, and they
would go back to their furrows looking forward to the time when they
should again reach the headland. The part that they had ploughed was dark
behind them, so that the field, though it was of gold, still looked as if
it were being ploughed—very curious to behold.



He wrought also a field of harvest corn, and the reapers were reaping with
sharp sickles in their hands. Swathe after swathe fell to the ground in a
straight line behind them, and the binders bound them in bands of twisted
straw. There were three binders, and behind them there were boys who
gathered the cut corn in armfuls and kept on bringing them to be bound:
among them all the owner of the land stood by in silence and was glad. The
servants were getting a meal ready under an oak, for they had sacrificed a
great ox, and were busy cutting him up, while the women were making a
porridge of much white barley for the labourers’ dinner.



He wrought also a vineyard, golden and fair to see, and the vines were
loaded with grapes. The bunches overhead were black, but the vines were
trained on poles of silver. He ran a ditch of dark metal all round it, and
fenced it with a fence of tin; there was only one path to it, and by this
the vintagers went when they would gather the vintage. Youths and maidens
all blithe and full of glee, carried the luscious fruit in plaited
baskets; and with them there went a boy who made sweet music with his
lyre, and sang the Linos-song with his clear boyish voice.



He wrought also a herd of horned cattle. He made the cows of gold and tin,
and they lowed as they came full speed out of the yards to go and feed
among the waving reeds that grow by the banks of the river. Along with the
cattle there went four shepherds, all of them in gold, and their nine
fleet dogs went with them. Two terrible lions had fastened on a bellowing
bull that was with the foremost cows, and bellow as he might they haled
him, while the dogs and men gave chase: the lions tore through the bull’s
thick hide and were gorging on his blood and bowels, but the herdsmen were
afraid to do anything, and only hounded on their dogs; the dogs dared not
fasten on the lions but stood by barking and keeping out of harm’s way.



The god wrought also a pasture in a fair mountain dell, and a large flock
of sheep, with a homestead and huts, and sheltered sheepfolds.



Furthermore he wrought a green, like that which Daedalus once made in
Cnossus for lovely Ariadne. Hereon there danced youths and maidens whom
all would woo, with their hands on one another’s wrists. The maidens wore
robes of light linen, and the youths well woven shirts that were slightly
oiled. The girls were crowned with garlands, while the young men had
daggers of gold that hung by silver baldrics; sometimes they would dance
deftly in a ring with merry twinkling feet, as it were a potter sitting at
his work and making trial of his wheel to see whether it will run, and
sometimes they would go all in line with one another, and much people was
gathered joyously about the green. There was a bard also to sing to them
and play his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst
of them when the man struck up with his tune.



All round the outermost rim of the shield he set the mighty stream of the
river Oceanus.



Then when he had fashioned the shield so great and strong, he made a
breastplate also that shone brighter than fire. He made a helmet, close
fitting to the brow, and richly worked, with a golden plume overhanging
it; and he made greaves also of beaten tin.



Lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took it and
set it before the mother of Achilles; whereon she darted like a falcon
from the snowy summits of Olympus and bore away the gleaming armour from
the house of Vulcan.

=== ILIAD BOOK 19 ===

Achilles is reconciled with Agamemnon, puts on the armour which Vulcan had
made him, and goes out to fight.



Now when Dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of Oceanus,
to bring light to mortals and immortals, Thetis reached the ships with the
armour that the god had given her. She found her son fallen about the body
of Patroclus and weeping bitterly. Many also of his followers were weeping
round him, but when the goddess came among them she clasped his hand in
her own, saying, “My son, grieve as we may we must let this man lie, for
it is by heaven’s will that he has fallen; now, therefore, accept from
Vulcan this rich and goodly armour, which no man has ever yet borne upon
his shoulders.”



As she spoke she set the armour before Achilles, and it rang out bravely
as she did so. The Myrmidons were struck with awe, and none dared look
full at it, for they were afraid; but Achilles was roused to still greater
fury, and his eyes gleamed with a fierce light, for he was glad when he
handled the splendid present which the god had made him. Then, as soon as
he had satisfied himself with looking at it, he said to his mother,
“Mother, the god has given me armour, meet handiwork for an immortal and
such as no-one living could have fashioned; I will now arm, but I much
fear that flies will settle upon the son of Menoetius and breed worms
about his wounds, so that his body, now he is dead, will be disfigured and
the flesh will rot.”



Silver-footed Thetis answered, “My son, be not disquieted about this
matter. I will find means to protect him from the swarms of noisome flies
that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle. He may lie
for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound as ever, or even
sounder. Call, therefore, the Achaean heroes in assembly; unsay your anger
against Agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might and main.”



As she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she then
dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of Patroclus, that his
body might suffer no change.



Then Achilles went out upon the sea-shore, and with a loud cry called on
the Achaean heroes. On this even those who as yet had stayed always at the
ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were about the
ships and served out rations, all came to the place of assembly because
Achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so long from fighting.
Two sons of Mars, Ulysses and the son of Tydeus, came limping, for their
wounds still pained them; nevertheless they came, and took their seats in
the front row of the assembly. Last of all came Agamemnon, king of men, he
too wounded, for Coon son of Antenor had struck him with a spear in
battle.



When the Achaeans were got together Achilles rose and said, “Son of
Atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me, when
we two were in such high anger about Briseis, surely it would have been
better, had Diana’s arrow slain her at the ships on the day when I took
her after having sacked Lyrnessus. For so, many an Achaean the less would
have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. It has been well
for Hector and the Trojans, but the Achaeans will long indeed remember our
quarrel. Now, however, let it be, for it is over. If we have been angry,
necessity has schooled our anger. I put it from me: I dare not nurse it
for ever; therefore, bid the Achaeans arm forthwith that I may go out
against the Trojans, and learn whether they will be in a mind to sleep by
the ships or no. Glad, I ween, will he be to rest his knees who may fly my
spear when I wield it.”



Thus did he speak, and the Achaeans rejoiced in that he had put away his
anger.



Then Agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the middle
of the assembly. “Danaan heroes,” said he, “servants of Mars, it is well
to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it is not seemly to interrupt
him, or it will go hard even with a practised speaker. Who can either hear
or speak in an uproar? Even the finest orator will be disconcerted by it.
I will expound to the son of Peleus, and do you other Achaeans heed me and
mark me well. Often have the Achaeans spoken to me of this matter and
upbraided me, but it was not I that did it: Jove, and Fate, and Erinys
that walks in darkness struck me mad when we were assembled on the day
that I took from Achilles the meed that had been awarded to him. What
could I do? All things are in the hand of heaven, and Folly, eldest of
Jove’s daughters, shuts men’s eyes to their destruction. She walks
delicately, not on the solid earth, but hovers over the heads of men to
make them stumble or to ensnare them.



“Time was when she fooled Jove himself, who they say is greatest whether
of gods or men; for Juno, woman though she was, beguiled him on the day
when Alcmena was to bring forth mighty Hercules in the fair city of
Thebes. He told it out among the gods saying, ‘Hear me, all gods and
goddesses, that I may speak even as I am minded; this day shall an
Ilithuia, helper of women who are in labour, bring a man child into the
world who shall be lord over all that dwell about him who are of my blood
and lineage.’ Then said Juno all crafty and full of guile, ‘You will play
false, and will not hold to your word. Swear me, O Olympian, swear me a
great oath, that he who shall this day fall between the feet of a woman,
shall be lord over all that dwell about him who are of your blood and
lineage.’



“Thus she spoke, and Jove suspected her not, but swore the great oath, to
his much ruing thereafter. For Juno darted down from the high summit of
Olympus, and went in haste to Achaean Argos where she knew that the noble
wife of Sthenelus son of Perseus then was. She being with child and in her
seventh month, Juno brought the child to birth though there was a month
still wanting, but she stayed the offspring of Alcmena, and kept back the
Ilithuiae. Then she went to tell Jove the son of Saturn, and said, ‘Father
Jove, lord of the lightning—I have a word for your ear. There is a
fine child born this day, Eurystheus, son to Sthenelus the son of Perseus;
he is of your lineage; it is well, therefore, that he should reign over
the Argives.’



“On this Jove was stung to the very quick, and in his rage he caught Folly
by the hair, and swore a great oath that never should she again invade
starry heaven and Olympus, for she was the bane of all. Then he whirled
her round with a twist of his hand, and flung her down from heaven so that
she fell on to the fields of mortal men; and he was ever angry with her
when he saw his son groaning under the cruel labours that Eurystheus laid
upon him. Even so did I grieve when mighty Hector was killing the Argives
at their ships, and all the time I kept thinking of Folly who had so baned
me. I was blind, and Jove robbed me of my reason; I will now make
atonement, and will add much treasure by way of amends. Go, therefore,
into battle, you and your people with you. I will give you all that
Ulysses offered you yesterday in your tents: or if it so please you, wait,
though you would fain fight at once, and my squires shall bring the gifts
from my ship, that you may see whether what I give you is enough.”



And Achilles answered, “Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, you can give
such gifts as you think proper, or you can withhold them: it is in your
own hands. Let us now set battle in array; it is not well to tarry talking
about trifles, for there is a deed which is as yet to do. Achilles shall
again be seen fighting among the foremost, and laying low the ranks of the
Trojans: bear this in mind each one of you when he is fighting.”



Then Ulysses said, “Achilles, godlike and brave, send not the Achaeans
thus against Ilius to fight the Trojans fasting, for the battle will be no
brief one, when it is once begun, and heaven has filled both sides with
fury; bid them first take food both bread and wine by the ships, for in
this there is strength and stay. No man can do battle the livelong day to
the going down of the sun if he is without food; however much he may want
to fight his strength will fail him before he knows it; hunger and thirst
will find him out, and his limbs will grow weary under him. But a man can
fight all day if he is full fed with meat and wine; his heart beats high,
and his strength will stay till he has routed all his foes; therefore,
send the people away and bid them prepare their meal; King Agamemnon will
bring out the gifts in presence of the assembly, that all may see them and
you may be satisfied. Moreover let him swear an oath before the Argives
that he has never gone up into the couch of Briseis, nor been with her
after the manner of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself of a
gracious mind; let Agamemnon entertain you in his tents with a feast of
reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full. As for you,
son of Atreus, treat people more righteously in future; it is no disgrace
even to a king that he should make amends if he was wrong in the first
instance.”



And King Agamemnon answered, “Son of Laertes, your words please me well,
for throughout you have spoken wisely. I will swear as you would have me
do; I do so of my own free will, neither shall I take the name of heaven
in vain. Let, then, Achilles wait, though he would fain fight at once, and
do you others wait also, till the gifts come from my tent and we ratify
the oath with sacrifice. Thus, then, do I charge you: take some noble
young Achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the gifts that I promised
yesterday to Achilles, and bring the women also; furthermore let
Talthybius find me a boar from those that are with the host, and make it
ready for sacrifice to Jove and to the sun.”



Then said Achilles, “Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, see to these
matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and when I am
calmer. Would you have men eat while the bodies of those whom Hector son
of Priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? Let the sons of the
Achaeans, say I, fight fasting and without food, till we have avenged
them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat their fill. As
for me, Patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked and hewn, with his
feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning round him. Therefore I can
take thought of nothing save only slaughter and blood and the rattle in
the throat of the dying.”



Ulysses answered, “Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest of all the Achaeans,
in battle you are better than I, and that more than a little, but in
counsel I am much before you, for I am older and of greater knowledge.
Therefore be patient under my words. Fighting is a thing of which men soon
surfeit, and when Jove, who is war’s steward, weighs the upshot, it may
well prove that the straw which our sickles have reaped is far heavier
than the grain. It may not be that the Achaeans should mourn the dead with
their bellies; day by day men fall thick and threefold continually; when
should we have respite from our sorrow? Let us mourn our dead for a day
and bury them out of sight and mind, but let those of us who are left eat
and drink that we may arm and fight our foes more fiercely. In that hour
let no man hold back, waiting for a second summons; such summons shall
bode ill for him who is found lagging behind at our ships; let us rather
sally as one man and loose the fury of war upon the Trojans.”



When he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of Nestor, with Meges
son of Phyleus, Thoas, Meriones, Lycomedes son of Creontes, and
Melanippus, and went to the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus. The word was
not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out the seven tripods
which Agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal cauldrons and the
twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled in useful arts, seven
in number, with Briseis, which made eight. Ulysses weighed out the ten
talents of gold and then led the way back, while the young Achaeans
brought the rest of the gifts, and laid them in the middle of the
assembly.



Agamemnon then rose, and Talthybius whose voice was like that of a god
came to him with the boar. The son of Atreus drew the knife which he wore
by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by cutting off some
bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in prayer as he did so. The
other Achaeans sat where they were all silent and orderly to hear the
king, and Agamemnon looked into the vault of heaven and prayed saying, “I
call Jove the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, I call also
Earth and Sun and the Erinyes who dwell below and take vengeance on him
who shall swear falsely, that I have laid no hand upon the girl Briseis,
neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that she has remained in
my tents inviolate. If I swear falsely may heaven visit me with all the
penalties which it metes out to those who perjure themselves.”



He cut the boar’s throat as he spoke, whereon Talthybius whirled it round
his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes. Then Achilles
also rose and said to the Argives, “Father Jove, of a truth you blind
men’s eyes and bane them. The son of Atreus had not else stirred me to so
fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken Briseis from me against my will.
Surely Jove must have counselled the destruction of many an Argive. Go,
now, and take your food that we may begin fighting.”



On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own ship.
The Myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the ship of
Achilles. They placed them in his tents, while the stable-men drove the
horses in among the others.



Briseis, fair as Venus, when she saw the mangled body of Patroclus, flung
herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck, and her
lovely face with both her hands. Beautiful as a goddess she wept and said,
“Patroclus, dearest friend, when I went hence I left you living; I return,
O prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows multiply upon me one
after the other. I saw him to whom my father and mother married me, cut
down before our city, and my three own dear brothers perished with him on
the self-same day; but you, Patroclus, even when Achilles slew my husband
and sacked the city of noble Mynes, told me that I was not to weep, for
you said you would make Achilles marry me, and take me back with him to
Phthia, we should have a wedding feast among the Myrmidons. You were
always kind to me and I shall never cease to grieve for you.”



She wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as though
their tears were for Patroclus, but in truth each was weeping for her own
sorrows. The elders of the Achaeans gathered round Achilles and prayed him
to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. “I pray you,” said he,
“if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat nor drink, for I am in
great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to the going down of the sun.”



On this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of Atreus
and Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the knight Phoenix, who stayed behind
and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow: but he would not
be comforted till he should have flung himself into the jaws of battle,
and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of Patroclus. Then he said—



“Hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner ready
for me at once and without delay when the Achaeans were hasting to fight
the Trojans; now, therefore, though I have meat and drink in my tents, yet
will I fast for sorrow. Grief greater than this I could not know, not even
though I were to hear of the death of my father, who is now in Phthia
weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here fighting the Trojans in a
strange land for the accursed sake of Helen, nor yet though I should hear
that my son is no more—he who is being brought up in Scyros—if
indeed Neoptolemus is still living. Till now I made sure that I alone was
to fall here at Troy away from Argos, while you were to return to Phthia,
bring back my son with you in your own ship, and show him all my property,
my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house—for Peleus must surely be
either dead, or what little life remains to him is oppressed alike with
the infirmities of age and ever present fear lest he should hear the sad
tidings of my death.”



He wept as he spoke, and the elders sighed in concert as each thought on
what he had left at home behind him. The son of Saturn looked down with
pity upon them, and said presently to Minerva, “My child, you have quite
deserted your hero; is he then gone so clean out of your recollection?
There he sits by the ships all desolate for the loss of his dear comrade,
and though the others are gone to their dinner he will neither eat nor
drink. Go then and drop nectar and ambrosia into his breast, that he may
know no hunger.”



With these words he urged Minerva, who was already of the same mind. She
darted down from heaven into the air like some falcon sailing on his broad
wings and screaming. Meanwhile the Achaeans were arming throughout the
host, and when Minerva had dropped nectar and ambrosia into Achilles so
that no cruel hunger should cause his limbs to fail him, she went back to
the house of her mighty father. Thick as the chill snow-flakes shed from
the hand of Jove and borne on the keen blasts of the north wind, even so
thick did the gleaming helmets, the bossed shields, the strongly plated
breastplates, and the ashen spears stream from the ships. The sheen
pierced the sky, the whole land was radiant with their flashing armour,
and the sound of the tramp of their treading rose from under their feet.
In the midst of them all Achilles put on his armour; he gnashed his teeth,
his eyes gleamed like fire, for his grief was greater than he could bear.
Thus, then, full of fury against the Trojans, did he don the gift of the
god, the armour that Vulcan had made him.



First he put on the goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and next he
did on the breastplate about his chest. He slung the silver-studded sword
of bronze about his shoulders, and then took up the shield so great and
strong that shone afar with a splendour as of the moon. As the light seen
by sailors from out at sea, when men have lit a fire in their homestead
high up among the mountains, but the sailors are carried out to sea by
wind and storm far from the haven where they would be—even so did
the gleam of Achilles’ wondrous shield strike up into the heavens. He
lifted the redoubtable helmet, and set it upon his head, from whence it
shone like a star, and the golden plumes which Vulcan had set thick about
the ridge of the helmet, waved all around it. Then Achilles made trial of
himself in his armour to see whether it fitted him, so that his limbs
could play freely under it, and it seemed to buoy him up as though it had
been wings.



He also drew his father’s spear out of the spear-stand, a spear so great
and heavy and strong that none of the Achaeans save only Achilles had
strength to wield it; this was the spear of Pelian ash from the topmost
ridges of Mt. Pelion, which Chiron had once given to Peleus, fraught with
the death of heroes. Automedon and Alcimus busied themselves with the
harnessing of his horses; they made the bands fast about them, and put the
bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back towards the chariot.
Automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the horses, and after him
Achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as the sun-god Hyperion. Then
with a loud voice he chided with his father’s horses saying, “Xanthus and
Balius, famed offspring of Podarge—this time when we have done
fighting be sure and bring your driver safely back to the host of the
Achaeans, and do not leave him dead on the plain as you did Patroclus.”



Then fleet Xanthus answered under the yoke—for white-armed Juno had
endowed him with human speech—and he bowed his head till his mane
touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band. “Dread
Achilles,” said he, “we will indeed save you now, but the day of your
death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven and
stern fate that will destroy you. Neither was it through any sloth or
slackness on our part that the Trojans stripped Patroclus of his armour;
it was the mighty god whom lovely Leto bore that slew him as he fought
among the foremost, and vouchsafed a triumph to Hector. We two can fly as
swiftly as Zephyrus who they say is fleetest of all winds; nevertheless it
is your doom to fall by the hand of a man and of a god.”



When he had thus said the Erinyes stayed his speech, and Achilles answered
him in great sadness, saying, “Why, O Xanthus, do you thus foretell my
death? You need not do so, for I well know that I am to fall here, far
from my dear father and mother; none the more, however, shall I stay my
hand till I have given the Trojans their fill of fighting.”



So saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.

=== ILIAD BOOK 20 ===

The gods hold a council and determine to watch the fight, from the hill
Callicolone, and the barrow of Hercules—A fight between Achilles and
AEneas is interrupted by Neptune, who saves AEneas—Achilles kills
many Trojans.



Thus, then, did the Achaeans arm by their ships round you, O son of
Peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the Trojans over against them
armed upon the rise of the plain.



Meanwhile Jove from the top of many-delled Olympus, bade Themis gather the
gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the house of
Jove. There was not a river absent except Oceanus, nor a single one of the
nymphs that haunt fair groves, or springs of rivers and meadows of green
grass. When they reached the house of cloud-compelling Jove, they took
their seats in the arcades of polished marble which Vulcan with his
consummate skill had made for father Jove.



In such wise, therefore, did they gather in the house of Jove. Neptune
also, lord of the earthquake, obeyed the call of the goddess, and came up
out of the sea to join them. There, sitting in the midst of them, he asked
what Jove’s purpose might be. “Why,” said he, “wielder of the lightning,
have you called the gods in council? Are you considering some matter that
concerns the Trojans and Achaeans—for the blaze of battle is on the
point of being kindled between them?”



And Jove answered, “You know my purpose, shaker of earth, and wherefore I
have called you hither. I take thought for them even in their destruction.
For my own part I shall stay here seated on Mt. Olympus and look on in
peace, but do you others go about among Trojans and Achaeans, and help
either side as you may be severally disposed. If Achilles fights the
Trojans without hindrance they will make no stand against him; they have
ever trembled at the sight of him, and now that he is roused to such fury
about his comrade, he will override fate itself and storm their city.”



Thus spoke Jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took their
several sides and went into battle. Juno, Pallas Minerva, earth-encircling
Neptune, Mercury bringer of good luck and excellent in all cunning—all
these joined the host that came from the ships; with them also came Vulcan
in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin legs plying lustily under
him. Mars of gleaming helmet joined the Trojans, and with him Apollo of
locks unshorn, and the archer goddess Diana, Leto, Xanthus, and
laughter-loving Venus.



So long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the
Achaeans were triumphant, for Achilles who had long refused to fight was
now with them. There was not a Trojan but his limbs failed him for fear as
he beheld the fleet son of Peleus all glorious in his armour, and looking
like Mars himself. When, however, the Olympians came to take their part
among men, forthwith uprose strong Strife, rouser of hosts, and Minerva
raised her loud voice, now standing by the deep trench that ran outside
the wall, and now shouting with all her might upon the shore of the
sounding sea. Mars also bellowed out upon the other side, dark as some
black thunder-cloud, and called on the Trojans at the top of his voice,
now from the acropolis, and now speeding up the side of the river Simois
till he came to the hill Callicolone.



Thus did the gods spur on both hosts to fight, and rouse fierce contention
also among themselves. The sire of gods and men thundered from heaven
above, while from beneath Neptune shook the vast earth, and bade the high
hills tremble. The spurs and crests of many-fountained Ida quaked, as also
the city of the Trojans and the ships of the Achaeans. Hades, king of the
realms below, was struck with fear; he sprang panic-stricken from his
throne and cried aloud in terror lest Neptune, lord of the earthquake,
should crack the ground over his head, and lay bare his mouldy mansions to
the sight of mortals and immortals—mansions so ghastly grim that
even the gods shudder to think of them. Such was the uproar as the gods
came together in battle. Apollo with his arrows took his stand to face
King Neptune, while Minerva took hers against the god of war; the
archer goddess Diana with her golden arrows, sister of far-darting Apollo,
stood to face Juno; Mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced Leto,
while the mighty eddying river whom men can Scamander, but gods Xanthus,
matched himself against Vulcan.



The gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. But the heart of
Achilles was set on meeting Hector son of Priam, for it was with his blood
that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of battle.
Meanwhile Apollo set Aeneas on to attack the son of Peleus, and put
courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of Lycaon son of Priam. In
his likeness therefore, he said to Aeneas, “Aeneas, counsellor of the
Trojans, where are now the brave words with which you vaunted over your
wine before the Trojan princes, saying that you would fight Achilles son
of Peleus in single combat?”



And Aeneas answered, “Why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of
Peleus, when I am in no mind to do so? Were I to face him now, it would
not be for the first time. His spear has already put me to flight from
Ida, when he attacked our cattle and sacked Lyrnessus and Pedasus; Jove
indeed saved me in that he vouchsafed me strength to fly, else had I
fallen by the hands of Achilles and Minerva, who went before him to
protect him and urged him to fall upon the Lelegae and Trojans. No man may
fight Achilles, for one of the gods is always with him as his guardian
angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever straight, and fails
not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him; if heaven would let me
fight him on even terms he should not soon overcome me, though he boasts
that he is made of bronze.”



Then said King Apollo, son to Jove, “Nay, hero, pray to the ever-living
gods, for men say that you were born of Jove’s daughter Venus, whereas
Achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. Venus is child to Jove,
while Thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. Bring, therefore,
your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with his taunts and
menaces.”



As he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his people,
and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost fighters. Nor
did the son of Anchises escape the notice of white-armed Juno, as he went
forth into the throng to meet Achilles. She called the gods about her, and
said, “Look to it, you two, Neptune and Minerva, and consider how this
shall be; Phoebus Apollo has been sending Aeneas clad in full armour to
fight Achilles. Shall we turn him back at once, or shall one of us stand
by Achilles and endow him with strength so that his heart fail not, and he
may learn that the chiefs of the immortals are on his side, while the
others who have all along been defending the Trojans are but vain helpers?
Let us all come down from Olympus and join in the fight, that this day he
may take no hurt at the hands of the Trojans. Hereafter let him suffer
whatever fate may have spun out for him when he was begotten and his
mother bore him. If Achilles be not thus assured by the voice of a god, he
may come to fear presently when one of us meets him in battle, for the
gods are terrible if they are seen face to face.”



Neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, “Juno, restrain your
fury; it is not well; I am not in favour of forcing the other gods to
fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on our own side; let us take
our places on some hill out of the beaten track, and let mortals fight it
out among themselves. If Mars or Phoebus Apollo begin fighting, or keep
Achilles in check so that he cannot fight, we too, will at once raise the
cry of battle, and in that case they will soon leave the field and go back
vanquished to Olympus among the other gods.”



With these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high earth-barrow
of Hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by the Trojans and Pallas
Minerva for him to fly to when the sea-monster was chasing him from the
shore on to the plain. Here Neptune and those that were with him took
their seats, wrapped in a thick cloud of darkness; but the other gods
seated themselves on the brow of Callicolone round you, O Phoebus, and
Mars the waster of cities.



Thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither side was
willing to begin battle with the other, and Jove from his seat on high was
in command over them all. Meanwhile the whole plain was alive with men and
horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. The earth rang again under
the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards each other, and two
champions, by far the foremost of them all, met between the hosts to fight—to
wit, Aeneas son of Anchises, and noble Achilles.



Aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet tossing
defiance as he came on. He held his strong shield before his breast, and
brandished his bronze spear. The son of Peleus from the other side sprang
forth to meet him, like some fierce lion that the whole country-side has
met to hunt and kill—at first he bodes no ill, but when some daring
youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches openmouthed, his jaws foam,
he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from side to side about his ribs
and loins, and glares as he springs straight before him, to find out
whether he is to slay, or be slain among the foremost of his foes—even
with such fury did Achilles burn to spring upon Aeneas.



When they were now close up with one another Achilles was first to speak.
“Aeneas,” said he, “why do you stand thus out before the host to fight me?
Is it that you hope to reign over the Trojans in the seat of Priam? Nay,
though you kill me Priam will not hand his kingdom over to you. He is a
man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his own. Or have the Trojans
been allotting you a demesne of passing richness, fair with orchard lawns
and corn lands, if you should slay me? This you shall hardly do. I have
discomfited you once already. Have you forgotten how when you were alone I
chased you from your herds helter-skelter down the slopes of Ida? You did
not turn round to look behind you; you took refuge in Lyrnessus, but I
attacked the city, and with the help of Minerva and father Jove I sacked
it and carried its women into captivity, though Jove and the other gods
rescued you. You think they will protect you now, but they will not do so;
therefore I say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue
it. Even a fool may be wise after the event.”



Then Aeneas answered, “Son of Peleus, think not that your words can scare
me as though I were a child. I too, if I will, can brag and talk unseemly.
We know one another’s race and parentage as matters of common fame, though
neither have you ever seen my parents nor I yours. Men say that you are
son to noble Peleus, and that your mother is Thetis, fair-haired daughter
of the sea. I have noble Anchises for my father, and Venus for my mother;
the parents of one or other of us shall this day mourn a son, for it will
be more than silly talk that shall part us when the fight is over. Learn,
then, my lineage if you will—and it is known to many.



“In the beginning Dardanus was the son of Jove, and founded Dardania, for
Ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men to dwell in, and her
people still abode on the spurs of many-fountained Ida. Dardanus had a
son, king Erichthonius, who was wealthiest of all men living; he had three
thousand mares that fed by the water-meadows, they and their foals with
them. Boreas was enamoured of them as they were feeding, and covered them
in the semblance of a dark-maned stallion. Twelve filly foals did they
conceive and bear him, and these, as they sped over the rich plain, would
go bounding on over the ripe ears of corn and not break them; or again
when they would disport themselves on the broad back of Ocean they could
gallop on the crest of a breaker. Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the
Trojans, and Tros had three noble sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede who
was comeliest of mortal men; wherefore the gods carried him off to be
Jove’s cup-bearer, for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwell among the
immortals. Ilus begat Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonus, Priam,
Lampus, Clytius, and Hiketaon of the stock of Mars. But Assaracus was
father to Capys, and Capys to Anchises, who was my father, while Hector is
son to Priam.



“Such do I declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, Jove gives it
or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. And now let there be no
more of this prating in mid-battle as though we were children. We could
fling taunts without end at one another; a hundred-oared galley would not
hold them. The tongue can run all whithers and talk all wise; it can go
here and there, and as a man says, so shall he be gainsaid. What is the
use of our bandying hard like women who when they fall foul of one another
go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the other lies, as
rage inspires them? No words of yours shall turn me now that I am fain to
fight—therefore let us make trial of one another with our spears.”



As he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of
Achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. The son of Peleus held
the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid, for he
deemed that Aeneas’s spear would go through it quite easily, not
reflecting that the god’s glorious gifts were little likely to yield
before the blows of mortal men; and indeed Aeneas’s spear did not pierce
the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point. It
went through two layers, but the god had made the shield in five, two of
bronze, the two innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it was in this
that the spear was stayed.



Achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of Aeneas at the
very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of Pelian ash went
clean through, and the shield rang under the blow; Aeneas was afraid, and
crouched backwards, holding the shield away from him; the spear, however,
flew over his back, and stuck quivering in the ground, after having gone
through both circles of the sheltering shield. Aeneas though he had
avoided the spear, stood still, blinded with fear and grief because the
weapon had gone so near him; then Achilles sprang furiously upon him, with
a cry as of death and with his keen blade drawn, and Aeneas seized a great
stone, so huge that two men, as men now are, would be unable to lift it,
but Aeneas wielded it quite easily.



Aeneas would then have struck Achilles as he was springing towards him,
either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and Achilles
would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not
Neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith to
the immortals, “Alas, I am sorry for great Aeneas, who will now go down to
the house of Hades, vanquished by the son of Peleus. Fool that he was to
give ear to the counsel of Apollo. Apollo will never save him from
destruction. Why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to no
purpose, and in another’s quarrel? Has he not at all times offered
acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? Let us then snatch
him from death’s jaws, lest the son of Saturn be angry should Achilles
slay him. It is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and that the race
of Dardanus, whom Jove loved above all the sons born to him of mortal
women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. For now indeed has
Jove hated the blood of Priam, while Aeneas shall reign over the Trojans,
he and his children’s children that shall be born hereafter.”



Then answered Juno, “Earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and
consider concerning Aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him,
brave though he be, to fall by the hand of Achilles son of Peleus. For of
a truth we two, I and Pallas Minerva, have sworn full many a time before
all the immortals, that never would we shield Trojans from destruction,
not even when all Troy is burning in the flames that the Achaeans shall
kindle.”



When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went into the battle amid the
clash of spears, and came to the place where Achilles and Aeneas were.
Forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of Peleus, drew
the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of Aeneas, and laid it at
the feet of Achilles. Then he lifted Aeneas on high from off the earth and
hurried him away. Over the heads of many a band of warriors both horse and
foot did he soar as the god’s hand sped him, till he came to the very
fringe of the battle where the Cauconians were arming themselves for
fight. Neptune, shaker of the earth, then came near to him and said,
“Aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly in fighting the son of
Peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour and more beloved of heaven
than you are? Give way before him whensoever you meet him, lest you go
down to the house of Hades even though fate would have it otherwise. When
Achilles is dead you may then fight among the foremost undaunted, for none
other of the Achaeans shall slay you.”



The god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at once
removed the darkness from before the eyes of Achilles, who opened them
wide indeed and said in great anger, “Alas! what marvel am I now
beholding? Here is my spear upon the ground, but I see not him whom I
meant to kill when I hurled it. Of a truth Aeneas also must be under
heaven’s protection, although I had thought his boasting was idle. Let him
go hang; he will be in no mood to fight me further, seeing how narrowly he
has missed being killed. I will now give my orders to the Danaans and
attack some other of the Trojans.”



He sprang forward along the line and cheered his men on as he did so. “Let
not the Trojans,” he cried, “keep you at arm’s length, Achaeans, but go
for them and fight them man for man. However valiant I may be, I cannot
give chase to so many and fight all of them. Even Mars, who is an
immortal, or Minerva, would shrink from flinging himself into the jaws of
such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless, so far as in me lies I
will show no slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance, not even for
a moment; I will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the Trojan who
shall venture within reach of my spear.”



Thus did he exhort them. Meanwhile Hector called upon the Trojans and
declared that he would fight Achilles. “Be not afraid, proud Trojans,”
said he, “to face the son of Peleus; I could fight gods myself if the
battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for me,
if we had to use our spears. Even so the deed of Achilles will fall
somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he will
clip short. I will go up against him though his hands be as fire—though
his hands be fire and his strength iron.”



Thus urged the Trojans lifted up their spears against the Achaeans, and
raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst of their
ranks. But Phoebus Apollo came up to Hector and said, “Hector, on no
account must you challenge Achilles to single combat; keep a look-out for
him while you are under cover of the others and away from the thick of the
fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you down at
close quarters.”



Thus he spoke, and Hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid
when he heard what the god had said to him. Achilles then sprang upon the
Trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment. First he
killed Iphition son of Otrynteus, a leader of much people whom a naiad
nymph had borne to Otrynteus waster of cities, in the land of Hyde under
the snowy heights of Mt. Tmolus. Achilles struck him full on the head as
he was coming on towards him, and split it clean in two; whereon he fell
heavily to the ground and Achilles vaunted over him saying, “You be low,
son of Otrynteus, mighty hero; your death is here, but your lineage is on
the Gygaean lake where your father’s estate lies, by Hyllus, rich in fish,
and the eddying waters of Hermus.”



Thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. The chariots
of the Achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over him in the front of
the battle, and after him Achilles killed Demoleon, a valiant man of war
and son to Antenor. He struck him on the temple through his bronze-cheeked
helmet. The helmet did not stay the spear, but it went right on, crushing
the bone so that the brain inside was shed in all directions, and his lust
of fighting was ended. Then he struck Hippodamas in the midriff as he was
springing down from his chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. He
breathed his last, bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are
dragging him to offer him in sacrifice to the King of Helice, and the
heart of the earth-shaker is glad; even so did he bellow as he lay dying.
Achilles then went in pursuit of Polydorus son of Priam, whom his father
had always forbidden to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the
one he loved best, and the fastest runner. He, in his folly and showing
off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks until
he lost his life, for Achilles struck him in the middle of the back as he
was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden fastenings of his
belt and where the two pieces of the double breastplate overlapped. The
point of the spear pierced him through and came out by the navel, whereon
he fell groaning on to his knees and a cloud of darkness overshadowed him
as he sank holding his entrails in his hands.



When Hector saw his brother Polydorus with his entrails in his hands and
sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his eyes, and he could not
bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his spear and
darted towards Achilles like a flame of fire. When Achilles saw him he
bounded forward and vaunted saying, “This is he that has wounded my heart
most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. Not for long shall we two
quail before one another on the highways of war.”



He looked fiercely on Hector and said, “Draw near, that you may meet your
doom the sooner.” Hector feared him not and answered, “Son of Peleus,
think not that your words can scare me as though I were a child; I too if
I will can brag and talk unseemly; I know that you are a mighty warrior,
mightier by far than I, nevertheless the issue lies in the lap of heaven
whether I, worse man though I be, may not slay you with my spear, for this
too has been found keen ere now.”



He hurled his spear as he spoke, but Minerva breathed upon it, and though
she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going towards
Achilles, so that it returned to Hector and lay at his feet in front of
him. Achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud cry, bent on
killing him, but Apollo caught him up easily as a god can, and hid him in
a thick darkness. Thrice did Achilles spring towards him spear in hand,
and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air. When he rushed forward for
the fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted aloud saying, “Hound,
this time too you have escaped death—but of a truth it came
exceedingly near you. Phoebus Apollo, to whom it seems you pray before you
go into battle, has again saved you; but if I too have any friend among
the gods I will surely make an end of you when I come across you at some
other time. Now, however, I will pursue and overtake other Trojans.”



On this he struck Dryops with his spear, about the middle of his neck, and
he fell headlong at his feet. There he let him lie and stayed Demouchus
son of Philetor, a man both brave and of great stature, by hitting him on
the knee with a spear; then he smote him with his sword and killed him.
After this he sprang on Laogonus and Dardanus, sons of Bias, and threw
them from their chariot, the one with a blow from a thrown spear, while
the other he cut down in hand-to-hand fight. There was also Tros the son
of Alastor—he came up to Achilles and clasped his knees in the hope
that he would spare him and not kill him but let him go, because they were
both of the same age. Fool, he might have known that he should not prevail
with him, for the man was in no mood for pity or forbearance but was in
grim earnest. Therefore when Tros laid hold of his knees and sought a
hearing for his prayers, Achilles drove his sword into his liver, and the
liver came rolling out, while his bosom was all covered with the black
blood that welled from the wound. Thus did death close his eyes as he lay
lifeless.



Achilles then went up to Mulius and struck him on the ear with a spear,
and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear. He also struck
Echeclus son of Agenor on the head with his sword, which became warm with
the blood, while death and stern fate closed the eyes of Echeclus. Next in
order the bronze point of his spear wounded Deucalion in the fore-arm
where the sinews of the elbow are united, whereon he waited Achilles’
onset with his arm hanging down and death staring him in the face.
Achilles cut his head off with a blow from his sword and flung it helmet
and all away from him, and the marrow came oozing out of his backbone as
he lay. He then went in pursuit of Rhigmus, noble son of Peires, who had
come from fertile Thrace, and struck him through the middle with a spear
which fixed itself in his belly, so that he fell headlong from his
chariot. He also speared Areithous squire to Rhigmus in the back as he was
turning his horses in flight, and thrust him from his chariot, while the
horses were struck with panic.



As a fire raging in some mountain glen after long drought—and the
dense forest is in a blaze, while the wind carries great tongues of fire
in every direction—even so furiously did Achilles rage, wielding his
spear as though he were a god, and giving chase to those whom he would
slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. Or as one who yokes broad-browed
oxen that they may tread barley in a threshing-floor—and it is soon
bruised small under the feet of the lowing cattle—even so did the
horses of Achilles trample on the shields and bodies of the slain. The
axle underneath and the railing that ran round the car were bespattered
with clots of blood thrown up by the horses’ hoofs, and from the tyres of
the wheels; but the son of Peleus pressed on to win still further glory,
and his hands were bedrabbled with gore.

=== ILIAD BOOK 21 ===

The fight between Achilles and the river Scamander—The gods fight
among themselves—Achilles drives the Trojans within their gates.



Now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river Xanthus, begotten
of immortal Jove, Achilles cut their forces in two: one half he chased
over the plain towards the city by the same way that the Achaeans had
taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding day with Hector in full
triumph; this way did they fly pell-mell, and Juno sent down a thick mist
in front of them to stay them. The other half were hemmed in by the deep
silver-eddying stream, and fell into it with a great uproar. The waters
resounded, and the banks rang again, as they swam hither and thither with
loud cries amid the whirling eddies. As locusts flying to a river before
the blast of a grass fire—the flame comes on and on till at last it
overtakes them and they huddle into the water—even so was the
eddying stream of Xanthus filled with the uproar of men and horses, all
struggling in confusion before Achilles.



Forthwith the hero left his spear upon the bank, leaning it against a
tamarisk bush, and plunged into the river like a god, armed with his sword
only. Fell was his purpose as he hewed the Trojans down on every side.
Their dying groans rose hideous as the sword smote them, and the river ran
red with blood. As when fish fly scared before a huge dolphin, and fill
every nook and corner of some fair haven—for he is sure to eat all
he can catch—even so did the Trojans cower under the banks of the
mighty river, and when Achilles’ arms grew weary with killing them, he
drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to sacrifice in revenge for
Patroclus son of Menoetius. He drew them out like dazed fawns, bound their
hands behind them with the girdles of their own shirts, and gave them over
to his men to take back to the ships. Then he sprang into the river,
thirsting for still further blood.



There he found Lycaon, son of Priam seed of Dardanus, as he was escaping
out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner when he was in
his father’s vineyard, having set upon him by night, as he was cutting
young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker sides of a chariot.
Achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares, and sent him by sea to
Lemnos, where the son of Jason bought him. But a guest-friend, Eetion of
Imbros, freed him with a great sum, and sent him to Arisbe, whence he had
escaped and returned to his father’s house. He had spent eleven days
happily with his friends after he had come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth
heaven again delivered him into the hands of Achilles, who was to send him
to the house of Hades sorely against his will. He was unarmed when
Achilles caught sight of him, and had neither helmet nor shield; nor yet
had he any spear, for he had thrown all his armour from him on to the
bank, and was sweating with his struggles to get out of the river, so that
his strength was now failing him.



Then Achilles said to himself in his surprise, “What marvel do I see here?
If this man can come back alive after having been sold over into Lemnos, I
shall have the Trojans also whom I have slain rising from the world below.
Could not even the waters of the grey sea imprison him, as they do many
another whether he will or no? This time let him taste my spear, that I
may know for certain whether mother earth who can keep even a strong man
down, will be able to hold him, or whether thence too he will return.”



Thus did he pause and ponder. But Lycaon came up to him dazed and trying
hard to embrace his knees, for he would fain live, not die. Achilles
thrust at him with his spear, meaning to kill him, but Lycaon ran
crouching up to him and caught his knees, whereby the spear passed over
his back, and stuck in the ground, hungering though it was for blood. With
one hand he caught Achilles’ knees as he besought him, and with the other
he clutched the spear and would not let it go. Then he said, “Achilles,
have mercy upon me and spare me, for I am your suppliant. It was in your
tents that I first broke bread on the day when you took me prisoner in the
vineyard; after which you sold me away to Lemnos far from my father and my
friends, and I brought you the price of a hundred oxen. I have paid three
times as much to gain my freedom; it is but twelve days that I have come
to Ilius after much suffering, and now cruel fate has again thrown me into
your hands. Surely father Jove must hate me, that he has given me over to
you a second time. Short of life indeed did my mother Laothoe bear me,
daughter of aged Altes—of Altes who reigns over the warlike Lelegae
and holds steep Pedasus on the river Satnioeis. Priam married his daughter
along with many other women and two sons were born of her, both of whom
you will have slain. Your spear slew noble Polydorus as he was fighting in
the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for I fear that I shall
not escape you since heaven has delivered me over to you. Furthermore I
say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me, for I am not of the same
womb as Hector who slew your brave and noble comrade.”



With such words did the princely son of Priam beseech Achilles; but
Achilles answered him sternly. “Idiot,” said he, “talk not to me of
ransom. Until Patroclus fell I preferred to give the Trojans quarter, and
sold beyond the sea many of those whom I had taken alive; but now not a
man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before the city
of Ilius—and of all Trojans it shall fare hardest with the sons of
Priam. Therefore, my friend, you too shall die. Why should you whine in
this way? Patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you are. I too—see
you not how I am great and goodly? I am son to a noble father, and have a
goddess for my mother, but the hands of doom and death overshadow me all
as surely. The day will come, either at dawn or dark, or at the noontide,
when one shall take my life also in battle, either with his spear, or with
an arrow sped from his bow.”



Thus did he speak, and Lycaon’s heart sank within him. He loosed his hold
of the spear, and held out both hands before him; but Achilles drew his
keen blade, and struck him by the collar-bone on his neck; he plunged his
two-edged sword into him to the very hilt, whereon he lay at full length
on the ground, with the dark blood welling from him till the earth was
soaked. Then Achilles caught him by the foot and flung him into the river
to go down stream, vaunting over him the while, and saying, “Lie there
among the fishes, who will lick the blood from your wound and gloat over
it; your mother shall not lay you on any bier to mourn you, but the eddies
of Scamander shall bear you into the broad bosom of the sea. There shall
the fishes feed on the fat of Lycaon as they dart under the dark ripple of
the waters—so perish all of you till we reach the citadel of strong
Ilius—you in flight, and I following after to destroy you. The river
with its broad silver stream shall serve you in no stead, for all the
bulls you offered him and all the horses that you flung living into his
waters. None the less miserably shall you perish till there is not a man
of you but has paid in full for the death of Patroclus and the havoc you
wrought among the Achaeans whom you have slain while I held aloof from
battle.”



So spoke Achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered
within himself how he should stay the hand of Achilles and save the
Trojans from disaster. Meanwhile the son of Peleus, spear in hand, sprang
upon Asteropaeus son of Pelegon to kill him. He was son to the broad river
Axius and Periboea eldest daughter of Acessamenus; for the river had lain
with her. Asteropaeus stood up out of the water to face him with a spear
in either hand, and Xanthus filled him with courage, being angry for the
death of the youths whom Achilles was slaying ruthlessly within his
waters. When they were close up with one another Achilles was first to
speak. “Who and whence are you,” said he, “who dare to face me? Woe to the
parents whose son stands up against me.” And the son of Pelegon answered,
“Great son of Peleus, why should you ask my lineage. I am from the fertile
land of far Paeonia, captain of the Paeonians, and it is now eleven days
that I am at Ilius. I am of the blood of the river Axius—of Axius
that is the fairest of all rivers that run. He begot the famed warrior
Pelegon, whose son men call me. Let us now fight, Achilles.”



Thus did he defy him, and Achilles raised his spear of Pelian ash.
Asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use both hands
alike; with the one spear he struck Achilles’ shield, but did not pierce
it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point; with the
other spear he grazed the elbow of Achilles’ right arm drawing dark blood,
but the spear itself went by him and fixed itself in the ground, foiled of
its bloody banquet. Then Achilles, fain to kill him, hurled his spear at
Asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck the steep bank of the river,
driving the spear half its length into the earth. The son of Peleus then
drew his sword and sprang furiously upon him. Asteropaeus vainly tried to
draw Achilles’ spear out of the bank by main force; thrice did he tug at
it, trying with all his might to draw it out, and thrice he had to leave
off trying; the fourth time he tried to bend and break it, but ere he
could do so Achilles smote him with his sword and killed him. He struck
him in the belly near the navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out
on to the ground, and the darkness of death came over him as he lay
gasping. Then Achilles set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his
armour, vaunting over him and saying, “Lie there—begotten of a river
though you be, it is hard for you to strive with the offspring of Saturn’s
son. You declare yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river, but I am
of the seed of mighty Jove. My father is Peleus, son of Aeacus ruler over
the many Myrmidons, and Aeacus was the son of Jove. Therefore as Jove is
mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his children
stronger than those of any river whatsoever. Moreover you have a great
river hard by if he can be of any use to you, but there is no fighting
against Jove the son of Saturn, with whom not even King Achelous can
compare, nor the mighty stream of deep-flowing Oceanus, from whom all
rivers and seas with all springs and deep wells proceed; even Oceanus
fears the lightnings of great Jove, and his thunder that comes crashing
out of heaven.”



With this he drew his bronze spear out of the bank, and now that he had
killed Asteropaeus, he let him lie where he was on the sand, with the dark
water flowing over him and the eels and fishes busy nibbling and gnawing
the fat that was about his kidneys. Then he went in chase of the
Paeonians, who were flying along the bank of the river in panic when they
saw their leader slain by the hands of the son of Peleus. Therein he slew
Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Oeneus, and Ophelestes,
and he would have slain yet others, had not the river in anger taken human
form, and spoken to him from out the deep waters saying, “Achilles, if you
excel all in strength, so do you also in wickedness, for the gods are ever
with you to protect you: if, then, the son of Saturn has vouchsafed it to
you to destroy all the Trojans, at any rate drive them out of my stream,
and do your grim work on land. My fair waters are now filled with corpses,
nor can I find any channel by which I may pour myself into the sea for I
am choked with dead, and yet you go on mercilessly slaying. I am in
despair, therefore, O captain of your host, trouble me no further.”



Achilles answered, “So be it, Scamander, Jove-descended; but I will never
cease dealing out death among the Trojans, till I have pent them up in
their city, and made trial of Hector face to face, that I may learn
whether he is to vanquish me, or I him.”



As he spoke he set upon the Trojans with a fury like that of the gods. But
the river said to Apollo, “Surely, son of Jove, lord of the silver bow,
you are not obeying the commands of Jove who charged you straitly that you
should stand by the Trojans and defend them, till twilight fades, and
darkness is over the earth.”



Meanwhile Achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the river
raised a high wave and attacked him. He swelled his stream into a torrent,
and swept away the many dead whom Achilles had slain and left within his
waters. These he cast out on to the land, bellowing like a bull the while,
but the living he saved alive, hiding them in his mighty eddies. The great
and terrible wave gathered about Achilles, falling upon him and beating on
his shield, so that he could not keep his feet; he caught hold of a great
elm-tree, but it came up by the roots, and tore away the bank, damming the
stream with its thick branches and bridging it all across; whereby
Achilles struggled out of the stream, and fled full speed over the plain,
for he was afraid.



But the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him with a
dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the Trojans from
destruction. The son of Peleus darted away a spear’s throw from him; swift
as the swoop of a black hunter-eagle which is the strongest and fleetest
of all birds, even so did he spring forward, and the armour rang loudly
about his breast. He fled on in front, but the river with a loud roar came
tearing after. As one who would water his garden leads a stream from some
fountain over his plants, and all his ground—spade in hand he clears
away the dams to free the channels, and the little stones run rolling
round and round with the water as it goes merrily down the bank faster
than the man can follow—even so did the river keep catching up with
Achilles albeit he was a fleet runner, for the gods are stronger than men.
As often as he would strive to stand his ground, and see whether or no all
the gods in heaven were in league against him, so often would the mighty
wave come beating down upon his shoulders, and he would have to keep
flying on and on in great dismay; for the angry flood was tiring him out
as it flowed past him and ate the ground from under his feet.



Then the son of Peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, “Father Jove,
is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save me from the
river? I do not care what may happen to me afterwards. I blame none of the
other dwellers on Olympus so severely as I do my dear mother, who has
beguiled and tricked me. She told me I was to fall under the walls of Troy
by the flying arrows of Apollo; would that Hector, the best man among the
Trojans, might there slay me; then should I fall a hero by the hand of a
hero; whereas now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end,
trapped in this river as though I were some swineherd’s boy, who gets
carried down a torrent while trying to cross it during a storm.”



As soon as he had spoken thus, Neptune and Minerva came up to him in the
likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him. Neptune
spoke first. “Son of Peleus,” said he, “be not so exceeding fearful; we
are two gods, come with Jove’s sanction to assist you, I, and Pallas
Minerva. It is not your fate to perish in this river; he will abate
presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise you, if you will be
guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting till you have pent the
Trojan host within the famed walls of Ilius—as many of them as may
escape. Then kill Hector and go back to the ships, for we will vouchsafe
you a triumph over him.”



When they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but Achilles
strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the gods had laid
upon him. All was now covered with the flood of waters, and much goodly
armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting about, as also many
corpses, but he forced his way against the stream, speeding right onwards,
nor could the broad waters stay him, for Minerva had endowed him with
great strength. Nevertheless Scamander did not slacken in his pursuit, but
was still more furious with the son of Peleus. He lifted his waters into a
high crest and cried aloud to Simois saying, “Dear brother, let the two of
us unite to save this man, or he will sack the mighty city of King Priam,
and the Trojans will not hold out against him. Help me at once; fill your
streams with water from their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury;
raise your wave on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you
that we may make an end of this savage creature who is now lording it as
though he were a god. Nothing shall serve him longer, not strength nor
comeliness, nor his fine armour, which forsooth shall soon be lying low in
the deep waters covered over with mud. I will wrap him in sand, and pour
tons of shingle round him, so that the Achaeans shall not know how to
gather his bones for the silt in which I shall have hidden him, and when
they celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow.”



On this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against Achilles, seething
as it was with foam and blood and the bodies of the dead. The dark waters
of the river stood upright and would have overwhelmed the son of Peleus,
but Juno, trembling lest Achilles should be swept away in the mighty
torrent, lifted her voice on high and called out to Vulcan her son.
“Crook-foot,” she cried, “my child, be up and doing, for I deem it is with
you that Xanthus is fain to fight; help us at once, kindle a fierce fire;
I will then bring up the west and the white south wind in a mighty
hurricane from the sea, that shall bear the flames against the heads and
armour of the Trojans and consume them, while you go along the banks of
Xanthus burning his trees and wrapping him round with fire. Let him not
turn you back neither by fair words nor foul, and slacken not till I shout
and tell you. Then you may stay your flames.”



On this Vulcan kindled a fierce fire, which broke out first upon the plain
and burned the many dead whom Achilles had killed and whose bodies were
lying about in great numbers; by this means the plain was dried and the
flood stayed. As the north wind, blowing on an orchard that has been
sodden with autumn rain, soon dries it, and the heart of the owner is glad—even
so the whole plain was dried and the dead bodies were consumed. Then he
turned tongues of fire on to the river. He burned the elms the willows and
the tamarisks, the lotus also, with the rushes and marshy herbage that
grew abundantly by the banks of the river. The eels and fishes that go
darting about everywhere in the water, these, too, were sorely harassed by
the flames that cunning Vulcan had kindled, and the river himself was
scalded, so that he spoke saying, “Vulcan, there is no god can hold his
own against you. I cannot fight you when you flare out your flames in this
way; strive with me no longer. Let Achilles drive the Trojans out of their
city immediately. What have I to do with quarrelling and helping people?”



He was boiling as he spoke, and all his waters were seething. As a
cauldron upon a large fire boils when it is melting the lard of some
fatted hog, and the lard keeps bubbling up all over when the dry faggots
blaze under it—even so were the goodly waters of Xanthus heated with
the fire till they were boiling. He could flow no longer but stayed his
stream, so afflicted was he by the blasts of fire which cunning Vulcan had
raised. Then he prayed to Juno and besought her saying, “Juno, why should
your son vex my stream with such especial fury? I am not so much to blame
as all the others are who have been helping the Trojans. I will leave off,
since you so desire it, and let your son leave off also. Furthermore I
swear never again will I do anything to save the Trojans from destruction,
not even when all Troy is burning in the flames which the Achaeans will
kindle.”



As soon as Juno heard this she said to her son Vulcan, “Son Vulcan, hold
now your flames; we ought not to use such violence against a god for the
sake of mortals.”



When she had thus spoken Vulcan quenched his flames, and the river went
back once more into his own fair bed.



Xanthus was now beaten, so these two left off fighting, for Juno stayed
them though she was still angry; but a furious quarrel broke out among the
other gods, for they were of divided counsels. They fell on one another
with a mighty uproar—earth groaned, and the spacious firmament rang
out as with a blare of trumpets. Jove heard as he was sitting on Olympus,
and laughed for joy when he saw the gods coming to blows among themselves.
They were not long about beginning, and Mars piercer of shields opened the
battle. Sword in hand he sprang at once upon Minerva and reviled her.
“Why, vixen,” said he, “have you again set the gods by the ears in the
pride and haughtiness of your heart? Have you forgotten how you set Diomed
son of Tydeus on to wound me, and yourself took visible spear and drove it
into me to the hurt of my fair body? You shall now suffer for what you
then did to me.”



As he spoke he struck her on the terrible tasselled aegis—so
terrible that not even can Jove’s lightning pierce it. Here did murderous
Mars strike her with his great spear. She drew back and with her strong
hand seized a stone that was lying on the plain—great and rugged and
black—which men of old had set for the boundary of a field. With
this she struck Mars on the neck, and brought him down. Nine roods did he
cover in his fall, and his hair was all soiled in the dust, while his
armour rang rattling round him. But Minerva laughed and vaunted over him
saying, “Idiot, have you not learned how far stronger I am than you, but
you must still match yourself against me? Thus do your mother’s curses now
roost upon you, for she is angry and would do you mischief because you
have deserted the Achaeans and are helping the Trojans.”



She then turned her two piercing eyes elsewhere, whereon Jove’s daughter
Venus took Mars by the hand and led him away groaning all the time, for it
was only with great difficulty that he had come to himself again. When
Queen Juno saw her, she said to Minerva, “Look, daughter of aegis-bearing
Jove, unweariable, that vixen Venus is again taking Mars through the crowd
out of the battle; go after her at once.”



Thus she spoke. Minerva sped after Venus with a will, and made at her,
striking her on the bosom with her strong hand so that she fell fainting
to the ground, and there they both lay stretched at full length. Then
Minerva vaunted over her saying, “May all who help the Trojans against the
Argives prove just as redoubtable and stalwart as Venus did when she came
across me while she was helping Mars. Had this been so, we should long
since have ended the war by sacking the strong city of Ilius.”



Juno smiled as she listened. Meanwhile King Neptune turned to Apollo
saying, “Phoebus, why should we keep each other at arm’s length? it is not
well, now that the others have begun fighting; it will be disgraceful to
us if we return to Jove’s bronze-floored mansion on Olympus without having
fought each other; therefore come on, you are the younger of the two, and
I ought not to attack you, for I am older and have had more experience.
Idiot, you have no sense, and forget how we two alone of all the gods
fared hardly round about Ilius when we came from Jove’s house and worked
for Laomedon a whole year at a stated wage and he gave us his orders. I
built the Trojans the wall about their city, so wide and fair that it
might be impregnable, while you, Phoebus, herded cattle for him in the
dales of many valleyed Ida. When, however, the glad hours brought round
the time of payment, mighty Laomedon robbed us of all our hire and sent us
off with nothing but abuse. He threatened to bind us hand and foot and
sell us over into some distant island. He tried, moreover, to cut off the
ears of both of us, so we went away in a rage, furious about the payment
he had promised us, and yet withheld; in spite of all this, you are now
showing favour to his people, and will not join us in compassing the utter
ruin of the proud Trojans with their wives and children.”



And King Apollo answered, “Lord of the earthquake, you would have no
respect for me if I were to fight you about a pack of miserable mortals,
who come out like leaves in summer and eat the fruit of the field, and
presently fall lifeless to the ground. Let us stay this fighting at once
and let them settle it among themselves.”



He turned away as he spoke, for he would lay no hand on the brother of his
own father. But his sister the huntress Diana, patroness of wild beasts,
was very angry with him and said, “So you would fly, Far-Darter, and hand
victory over to Neptune with a cheap vaunt to boot. Baby, why keep your
bow thus idle? Never let me again hear you bragging in my father’s house,
as you have often done in the presence of the immortals, that you would
stand up and fight with Neptune.”



Apollo made her no answer, but Jove’s august queen was angry and upbraided
her bitterly. “Bold vixen,” she cried, “how dare you cross me thus? For
all your bow you will find it hard to hold your own against me. Jove made
you as a lion among women, and lets you kill them whenever you choose. You
will find it better to chase wild beasts and deer upon the mountains than
to fight those who are stronger than you are. If you would try war, do so,
and find out by pitting yourself against me, how far stronger I am than
you are.”



She caught both Diana’s wrists with her left hand as she spoke, and with
her right she took the bow from her shoulders, and laughed as she beat her
with it about the ears while Diana wriggled and writhed under her blows.
Her swift arrows were shed upon the ground, and she fled weeping from
under Juno’s hand as a dove that flies before a falcon to the cleft of
some hollow rock, when it is her good fortune to escape. Even so did she
fly weeping away, leaving her bow and arrows behind her.



Then the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, said to Leto, “Leto, I shall
not fight you; it is ill to come to blows with any of Jove’s wives.
Therefore boast as you will among the immortals that you worsted me in
fair fight.”



Leto then gathered up Diana’s bow and arrows that had fallen about amid
the whirling dust, and when she had got them she made all haste after her
daughter. Diana had now reached Jove’s bronze-floored mansion on Olympus,
and sat herself down with many tears on the knees of her father, while her
ambrosial raiment was quivering all about her. The son of Saturn drew her
towards him, and laughing pleasantly the while began to question her
saying, “Which of the heavenly beings, my dear child, has been treating
you in this cruel manner, as though you had been misconducting yourself in
the face of everybody?” and the fair-crowned goddess of the chase
answered, “It was your wife Juno, father, who has been beating me; it is
always her doing when there is any quarrelling among the immortals.”



Thus did they converse, and meanwhile Phoebus Apollo entered the strong
city of Ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not hold out and the
Danaans should take the city then and there, before its hour had come; but
the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry and some triumphant
to Olympus, where they took their seats beside Jove lord of the storm-cloud,
while Achilles still kept on dealing out death alike on the Trojans
and on their horses. As when the smoke from some burning city ascends to
heaven when the anger of the gods has kindled it—there is then toil
for all, and sorrow for not a few—even so did Achilles bring toil
and sorrow on the Trojans.



Old King Priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on huge
Achilles as the Trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and there was none
to help them. Presently he came down from off the tower and with many a
groan went along the wall to give orders to the brave warders of the gate.
“Keep the gates,” said he, “wide open till the people come flying into the
city, for Achilles is hard by and is driving them in rout before him. I
see we are in great peril. As soon as our people are inside and in safety,
close the strong gates for I fear lest that terrible man should come
bounding inside along with the others.”



As he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when these
were opened there was a haven of refuge for the Trojans. Apollo then came
full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them. Right for the
city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy with dust, still
they fled on, with Achilles wielding his spear furiously behind them. For
he was as one possessed, and was thirsting after glory.



Then had the sons of the Achaeans taken the lofty gates of Troy if Apollo
had not spurred on Agenor, valiant and noble son to Antenor. He put
courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning
against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. When Agenor saw
Achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with care. “Alas,” said
he to himself in his dismay, “if I fly before mighty Achilles, and go
where all the others are being driven in rout, he will none the less catch
me and kill me for a coward. How would it be were I to let Achilles drive
the others before him, and then fly from the wall to the plain that is
behind Ilius till I reach the spurs of Ida and can hide in the underwood
that is thereon? I could then wash the sweat from off me in the river and
in the evening return to Ilius. But why commune with myself in this way?
Like enough he would see me as I am hurrying from the city over the plain,
and would speed after me till he had caught me—I should stand no
chance against him, for he is mightiest of all mankind. What, then, if I
go out and meet him in front of the city? His flesh too, I take it, can be
pierced by pointed bronze. Life is the same in one and all, and men say
that he is but mortal despite the triumph that Jove son of Saturn
vouchsafes him.”



So saying he stood on his guard and awaited Achilles, for he was now fain
to fight him. As a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert to
attack a hunter—she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying
of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound her
either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced her she
will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip or been killed
outright—even so did noble Agenor son of Antenor refuse to fly till
he had made trial of Achilles, and took aim at him with his spear, holding
his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. “Of a truth,”
said he, “noble Achilles, you deem that you shall this day sack the city
of the proud Trojans. Fool, there will be trouble enough yet before it,
for there is many a brave man of us still inside who will stand in front
of our dear parents with our wives and children, to defend Ilius. Here
therefore, huge and mighty warrior though you be, here shall you die.”



As he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear
struck Achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly wrought
tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him whom it had
struck, and did not pierce it, for the god’s gift stayed it. Achilles in
his turn attacked noble Agenor, but Apollo would not vouchsafe him glory,
for he snatched Agenor away and hid him in a thick mist, sending him out
of the battle unmolested. Then he craftily drew the son of Peleus away
from going after the host, for he put on the semblance of Agenor and stood
in front of Achilles, who ran towards him to give him chase and pursued
him over the corn lands of the plain, turning him towards the deep waters
of the river Scamander. Apollo ran but a little way before him and
beguiled Achilles by making him think all the time that he was on the
point of overtaking him. Meanwhile the rabble of routed Trojans was
thankful to crowd within the city till their numbers thronged it; no
longer did they dare wait for one another outside the city walls, to learn
who had escaped and who were fallen in fight, but all whose feet and knees
could still carry them poured pell-mell into the town.

=== ILIAD BOOK 22 ===

The death of Hector.



Thus the Trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from off
them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly
battlements, while the Achaeans with their shields laid upon their
shoulders drew close up to the walls. But stern fate bade Hector stay
where he was before Ilius and the Scaean gates. Then Phoebus Apollo spoke
to the son of Peleus saying, “Why, son of Peleus, do you, who are but man,
give chase to me who am immortal? Have you not yet found out that it is a
god whom you pursue so furiously? You did not harass the Trojans whom you
had routed, and now they are within their walls, while you have been
decoyed hither away from them. Me you cannot kill, for death can take no
hold upon me.”



Achilles was greatly angered and said, “You have baulked me, Far-Darter,
most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the wall, where
many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got within Ilius; you
have robbed me of great glory and have saved the Trojans at no risk to
yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but I would indeed have my revenge
if it were in my power to do so.”



On this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning
horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is flying over the
plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of Achilles bear him
onwards. King Priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain, all
radiant as the star which men call Orion’s Hound, and whose beams blaze
forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that
shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill for
mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train—even so did
Achilles’ armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. Priam raised a
cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted out
to his dear son, imploring him to return; but Hector still stayed before
the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with Achilles. The old
man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for pity’s sake come
within the walls. “Hector,” he cried, “my son, stay not to face this man
alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at the hands of the son of
Peleus, for he is mightier than you. Monster that he is; would indeed that
the gods loved him no better than I do, for so, dogs and vultures would
soon devour him as he lay stretched on earth, and a load of grief would be
lifted from my heart, for many a brave son has he reft from me, either by
killing them or selling them away in the islands that are beyond the sea:
even now I miss two sons from among the Trojans who have thronged within
the city, Lycaon and Polydorus, whom Laothoe peeress among women bore me.
Should they be still alive and in the hands of the Achaeans, we will
ransom them with gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old man
Altes endowed his daughter richly; but if they are already dead and in the
house of Hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were their parents; albeit
the grief of others will be more short-lived unless you too perish at the
hands of Achilles. Come, then, my son, within the city, to be the guardian
of Trojan men and Trojan women, or you will both lose your own life and
afford a mighty triumph to the son of Peleus. Have pity also on your
unhappy father while life yet remains to him—on me, whom the son of
Saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old age, after
I have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away as captives, my
bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed to earth amid the rage of
battle, and my sons’ wives dragged away by the cruel hands of the
Achaeans; in the end fierce hounds will tear me in pieces at my own gates
after some one has beaten the life out of my body with sword or
spear-hounds that I myself reared and fed at my own table to guard my
gates, but who will yet lap my blood and then lie all distraught at my
doors. When a young man falls by the sword in battle, he may lie where he
is and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be seen, all is honourable
in death, but when an old man is slain there is nothing in this world more
pitiable than that dogs should defile his grey hair and beard and all that
men hide for shame.”



The old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the heart of
Hector. His mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she bared her bosom
and pointed to the breast which had suckled him. “Hector,” she cried,
weeping bitterly the while, “Hector, my son, spurn not this breast, but
have pity upon me too: if I have ever given you comfort from my own bosom,
think on it now, dear son, and come within the wall to protect us from
this man; stand not without to meet him. Should the wretch kill you,
neither I nor your richly dowered wife shall ever weep, dear offshoot of
myself, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs will devour you at the
ships of the Achaeans.”



Thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved not the
heart of Hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge Achilles as he drew
nearer towards him. As a serpent in its den upon the mountains, full fed
with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man—he is filled with
fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round his den—even
so Hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted out from the wall
and stood where he was, undaunted.



“Alas,” said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, “if I go within
the gates, Polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me, for it
was he that urged me to lead the Trojans back to the city on that awful
night when Achilles again came forth against us. I would not listen, but
it would have been indeed better if I had done so. Now that my folly has
destroyed the host, I dare not look Trojan men and Trojan women in the
face, lest a worse man should say, ‘Hector has ruined us by his
self-confidence.’ Surely it would be better for me to return after having
fought Achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here before the city.
What, again, if I were to lay down my shield and helmet, lean my spear
against the wall and go straight up to noble Achilles? What if I were to
promise to give up Helen, who was the fountainhead of all this war, and
all the treasure that Alexandrus brought with him in his ships to Troy,
aye, and to let the Achaeans divide the half of everything that the city
contains among themselves? I might make the Trojans, by the mouths of
their princes, take a solemn oath that they would hide nothing, but would
divide into two shares all that is within the city—but why argue
with myself in this way? Were I to go up to him he would show me no kind
of mercy; he would kill me then and there as easily as though I were a
woman, when I had off my armour. There is no parleying with him from some
rock or oak tree as young men and maidens prattle with one another. Better
fight him at once, and learn to which of us Jove will vouchsafe victory.”



Thus did he stand and ponder, but Achilles came up to him as it were Mars
himself, plumed lord of battle. From his right shoulder he brandished his
terrible spear of Pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed around him like
flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. Fear fell upon Hector as he
beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was but fled in dismay
from before the gates, while Achilles darted after him at his utmost
speed. As a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds, swoops down upon some
cowering dove—the dove flies before him but the falcon with a shrill
scream follows close after, resolved to have her—even so did
Achilles make straight for Hector with all his might, while Hector fled
under the Trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take him.



On they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the wall, past
the look-out station, and past the weather-beaten wild fig-tree, till they
came to two fair springs which feed the river Scamander. One of these two
springs is warm, and steam rises from it as smoke from a burning fire, but
the other even in summer is as cold as hail or snow, or the ice that forms
on water. Here, hard by the springs, are the goodly washing-troughs of
stone, where in the time of peace before the coming of the Achaeans the
wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used to wash their clothes. Past
these did they fly, the one in front and the other giving chase behind
him: good was the man that fled, but better far was he that followed
after, and swiftly indeed did they run, for the prize was no mere beast
for sacrifice or bullock’s hide, as it might be for a common foot-race,
but they ran for the life of Hector. As horses in a chariot race speed
round the turning-posts when they are running for some great prize—a
tripod or woman—at the games in honour of some dead hero, so did
these two run full speed three times round the city of Priam. All the gods
watched them, and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.



“Alas,” said he, “my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued
round the walls of Troy; my heart is full of pity for Hector, who has
burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, one while on the
crests of many-valleyed Ida, and again on the citadel of Troy; and now I
see noble Achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of Priam. What
say you? Consider among yourselves and decide whether we shall now save
him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before Achilles, son of
Peleus.”



Then Minerva said, “Father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud and
storm, what mean you? Would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long been
decreed out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we others shall not
be of a mind with you.”



And Jove answered, “My child, Trito-born, take heart. I did not speak in
full earnest, and I will let you have your way. Do without let or
hindrance as you are minded.”



Thus did he urge Minerva who was already eager, and down she darted from
the topmost summits of Olympus.



Achilles was still in full pursuit of Hector, as a hound chasing a fawn
which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts through
glade and thicket. The fawn may try to elude him by crouching under cover
of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up until he gets her—even
so there was no escape for Hector from the fleet son of Peleus. Whenever
he made a set to get near the Dardanian gates and under the walls, that
his people might help him by showering down weapons from above, Achilles
would gain on him and head him back towards the plain, keeping himself
always on the city side. As a man in a dream who fails to lay hands upon
another whom he is pursuing—the one cannot escape nor the other
overtake—even so neither could Achilles come up with Hector, nor
Hector break away from Achilles; nevertheless he might even yet have
escaped death had not the time come when Apollo, who thus far had
sustained his strength and nerved his running, was now no longer to stay
by him. Achilles made signs to the Achaean host, and shook his head to
show that no man was to aim a dart at Hector, lest another might win the
glory of having hit him and he might himself come in second. Then, at
last, as they were nearing the fountains for the fourth time, the father
of all balanced his golden scales and placed a doom in each of them, one
for Achilles and the other for Hector. As he held the scales by the
middle, the doom of Hector fell down deep into the house of Hades—and
then Phoebus Apollo left him. Thereon Minerva went close up to the son of
Peleus and said, “Noble Achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely
take back to the ships a triumph for the Achaeans by slaying Hector, for
all his lust of battle. Do what Apollo may as he lies grovelling before
his father, aegis-bearing Jove, Hector cannot escape us longer. Stay here
and take breath, while I go up to him and persuade him to make a stand and
fight you.”



Thus spoke Minerva. Achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still, leaning
on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while Minerva left him and went after
Hector in the form and with the voice of Deiphobus. She came close up to
him and said, “Dear brother, I see you are hard pressed by Achilles who is
chasing you at full speed round the city of Priam, let us await his onset
and stand on our defence.”



And Hector answered, “Deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of all
my brothers, children of Hecuba and Priam, but henceforth I shall rate you
yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the wall for my
sake when all the others remain inside.”



Then Minerva said, “Dear brother, my father and mother went down on their
knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside, so great
a fear has fallen upon them all; but I was in an agony of grief when I
beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and fight, and let
there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may learn whether
Achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the ships, or whether he
shall fall before you.”



Thus did Minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now
close to one another great Hector was first to speak. “I will no longer
fly you, son of Peleus,” said he, “as I have been doing hitherto. Three
times have I fled round the mighty city of Priam, without daring to
withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for I am in the
mind to face you. Let us, then, give pledges to one another by our gods,
who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let it be
agreed between us that if Jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and I take
your life, I am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly fashion, but
when I have stripped you of your armour, I am to give up your body to the
Achaeans. And do you likewise.”



Achilles glared at him and answered, “Fool, prate not to me about
covenants. There can be no covenants between men and lions, wolves and
lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other out and out all
through. Therefore there can be no understanding between you and me, nor
may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall fall and
glut grim Mars with his life’s blood. Put forth all your strength; you
have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of war. You
have no more chance, and Pallas Minerva will forthwith vanquish you by my
spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief you have caused me on
account of my comrades whom you have killed in battle.”



He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. Hector saw it coming and
avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his head
and stuck in the ground beyond; Minerva then snatched it up and gave it
back to Achilles without Hector’s seeing her; Hector thereon said to the
son of Peleus, “You have missed your aim, Achilles, peer of the gods, and
Jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom, though you made sure
that he had done so. You were a false-tongued liar when you deemed that I
should forget my valour and quail before you. You shall not drive your
spear into the back of a runaway—drive it, should heaven so grant
you power, drive it into me as I make straight towards you; and now for
your own part avoid my spear if you can—would that you might receive
the whole of it into your body; if you were once dead the Trojans would
find the war an easier matter, for it is you who have harmed them most.”



He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. His aim was true for he hit
the middle of Achilles’ shield, but the spear rebounded from it, and did
not pierce it. Hector was angry when he saw that the weapon had sped from
his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no second spear.
With a loud cry he called Deiphobus and asked him for one, but there was
no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself, “Alas! the gods have
lured me on to my destruction. I deemed that the hero Deiphobus was by my
side, but he is within the wall, and Minerva has inveigled me; death is
now indeed exceedingly near at hand and there is no way out of it—for
so Jove and his son Apollo the far-darter have willed it, though
heretofore they have been ever ready to protect me. My doom has come upon
me; let me not then die ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me
first do some great thing that shall be told among men hereafter.”



As he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his
side, and gathering himself together be sprang on Achilles like a soaring
eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or timid hare—even
so did Hector brandish his sword and spring upon Achilles. Achilles mad
with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous shield before his breast,
and his gleaming helmet, made with four layers of metal, nodding fiercely
forward. The thick tresses of gold with which Vulcan had crested the
helmet floated round it, and as the evening star that shines brighter than
all others through the stillness of night, even such was the gleam of the
spear which Achilles poised in his right hand, fraught with the death of
noble Hector. He eyed his fair flesh over and over to see where he could
best wound it, but all was protected by the goodly armour of which Hector
had spoiled Patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where
the collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most
deadly place: here then did Achilles strike him as he was coming on
towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy part
of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could still
speak. Hector fell headlong, and Achilles vaunted over him saying,
“Hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when you were
spoiling Patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with him. Fool
that you were: for I, his comrade, mightier far than he, was still left
behind him at the ships, and now I have laid you low. The Achaeans shall
give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures shall work their
will upon yourself.”



Then Hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, “I pray you by your life
and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the ships of the
Achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze which my father
and mother will offer you, and send my body home, that the Trojans and
their wives may give me my dues of fire when I am dead.”



Achilles glared at him and answered, “Dog, talk not to me neither of knees
nor parents; would that I could be as sure of being able to cut your flesh
into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill you have done me, as I am that
nothing shall save you from the dogs—it shall not be, though they
bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the spot, with
promise of yet more hereafter. Though Priam son of Dardanus should bid
them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall never lay you
out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and vultures shall eat
you utterly up.”



Hector with his dying breath then said, “I know you what you are, and was
sure that I should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron; look to
it that I bring not heaven’s anger upon you on the day when Paris and
Phoebus Apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the Scaean
gates.”



When he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his soul
went out of him and flew down to the house of Hades, lamenting its sad
fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no longer. But Achilles said,
speaking to the dead body, “Die; for my part I will accept my fate
whensoever Jove and the other gods see fit to send it.”



As he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side; then
he stripped the blood-stained armour from Hector’s shoulders while the
other Achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength and beauty;
and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound. Then would one
turn to his neighbour and say, “It is easier to handle Hector now than
when he was flinging fire on to our ships”—and as he spoke he would
thrust his spear into him anew.



When Achilles had done spoiling Hector of his armour, he stood among the
Argives and said, “My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, now
that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who has done us more
hurt than all the others together, consider whether we should not attack
the city in force, and discover in what mind the Trojans may be. We should
thus learn whether they will desert their city now that Hector has fallen,
or will still hold out even though he is no longer living. But why argue
with myself in this way, while Patroclus is still lying at the ships
unburied, and unmourned—he whom I can never forget so long as I am
alive and my strength fails not? Though men forget their dead when once
they are within the house of Hades, yet not even there will I forget the
comrade whom I have lost. Now, therefore, Achaean youths, let us raise the
song of victory and go back to the ships taking this man along with us;
for we have achieved a mighty triumph and have slain noble Hector to whom
the Trojans prayed throughout their city as though he were a god.”



On this he treated the body of Hector with contumely: he pierced the
sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and passed thongs
of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he made the body fast to
his chariot, letting the head trail upon the ground. Then when he had put
the goodly armour on the chariot and had himself mounted, he lashed his
horses on and they flew forward nothing loth. The dust rose from Hector as
he was being dragged along, his dark hair flew all abroad, and his head
once so comely was laid low on earth, for Jove had now delivered him into
the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his own land.



Thus was the head of Hector being dishonoured in the dust. His mother tore
her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she looked upon
her son. His father made piteous moan, and throughout the city the people
fell to weeping and wailing. It was as though the whole of frowning Ilius
was being smirched with fire. Hardly could the people hold Priam back in
his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city. He grovelled in the
mire and besought them, calling each one of them by his name. “Let be, my
friends,” he cried, “and for all your sorrow, suffer me to go
single-handed to the ships of the Achaeans. Let me beseech this cruel and
terrible man, if maybe he will respect the feeling of his fellow-men, and
have compassion on my old age. His own father is even such another as
myself—Peleus, who bred him and reared him to be the bane of us
Trojans, and of myself more than of all others. Many a son of mine has he
slain in the flower of his youth, and yet, grieve for these as I may, I do
so for one—Hector—more than for them all, and the bitterness
of my sorrow will bring me down to the house of Hades. Would that he had
died in my arms, for so both his ill-starred mother who bore him, and
myself, should have had the comfort of weeping and mourning over him.”



Thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city joined
in his lament. Hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among the Trojans.
“Alas, my son,” she cried, “what have I left to live for now that you are
no more? Night and day did I glory in you throughout the city, for you
were a tower of strength to all in Troy, and both men and women alike
hailed you as a god. So long as you lived you were their pride, but now
death and destruction have fallen upon you.”



Hector’s wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her
that her husband had remained without the gates. She was at her loom in an
inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and embroidering it
with many flowers. She told her maids to set a large tripod on the fire,
so as to have a warm bath ready for Hector when he came out of battle;
poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond the reach of baths, and
that Minerva had laid him low by the hands of Achilles. She heard the cry
coming as from the wall, and trembled in every limb; the shuttle fell from
her hands, and again she spoke to her waiting-women. “Two of you,” she
said, “come with me that I may learn what it is that has befallen; I heard
the voice of my husband’s honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it
would come into my mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great
misfortune for Priam’s children must be at hand. May I never live to hear
it, but I greatly fear that Achilles has cut off the retreat of brave
Hector and has chased him on to the plain where he was single-handed; I
fear he may have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my
husband, who would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash
on far in front, foremost of them all in valour.”



Her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like a
maniac, with her waiting-women following after. When she reached the
battlements and the crowd of people, she stood looking out upon the wall,
and saw Hector being borne away in front of the city—the horses
dragging him without heed or care over the ground towards the ships of the
Achaeans. Her eyes were then shrouded as with the darkness of night and
she fell fainting backwards. She tore the attiring from her head and flung
it from her, the frontlet and net with its plaited band, and the veil
which golden Venus had given her on the day when Hector took her with him
from the house of Eetion, after having given countless gifts of wooing for
her sake. Her husband’s sisters and the wives of his brothers crowded
round her and supported her, for she was fain to die in her distraction;
when she again presently breathed and came to herself, she sobbed and made
lament among the Trojans saying, “Woe is me, O Hector; woe, indeed, that
to share a common lot we were born, you at Troy in the house of Priam, and
I at Thebes under the wooded mountain of Placus in the house of Eetion who
brought me up when I was a child—ill-starred sire of an ill-starred
daughter—would that he had never begotten me. You are now going into
the house of Hades under the secret places of the earth, and you leave me
a sorrowing widow in your house. The child, of whom you and I are the
unhappy parents, is as yet a mere infant. Now that you are gone, O Hector,
you can do nothing for him nor he for you. Even though he escape the
horrors of this woeful war with the Achaeans, yet shall his life
henceforth be one of labour and sorrow, for others will seize his lands.
The day that robs a child of his parents severs him from his own kind; his
head is bowed, his cheeks are wet with tears, and he will go about
destitute among the friends of his father, plucking one by the cloak and
another by the shirt. Some one or other of these may so far pity him as to
hold the cup for a moment towards him and let him moisten his lips, but he
must not drink enough to wet the roof of his mouth; then one whose parents
are alive will drive him from the table with blows and angry words. ‘Out
with you,’ he will say, ‘you have no father here,’ and the child will go
crying back to his widowed mother—he, Astyanax, who erewhile would
sit upon his father’s knees, and have none but the daintiest and choicest
morsels set before him. When he had played till he was tired and went to
sleep, he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on a soft couch,
knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has lost his father his
lot will be full of hardship—he, whom the Trojans name Astyanax,
because you, O Hector, were the only defence of their gates and
battlements. The wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at the ships,
far from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves upon you. You
will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and goodly raiment
made by hands of women. This will I now burn; it is of no use to you, for
you can never again wear it, and thus you will have respect shown you by
the Trojans both men and women.”



In such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in her
lament.

=== ILIAD BOOK 23 ===

The funeral of Patroclus, and the funeral games.



Thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the Achaeans when
they reached the Hellespont went back every man to his own ship. But
Achilles would not let the Myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave comrades
saying, “Myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends, not yet,
forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near to the body
and mourn Patroclus, in due honour to the dead. When we have had full
comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take supper all of us
here.”



On this they all joined in a cry of wailing and Achilles led them in their
lament. Thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round the body,
and Thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. The sands of the
sea-shore and the men’s armour were wet with their weeping, so great a
minister of fear was he whom they had lost. Chief in all their mourning
was the son of Peleus: he laid his blood-stained hand on the breast of his
friend. “Fare well,” he cried, “Patroclus, even in the house of Hades. I
will now do all that I erewhile promised you; I will drag Hector hither
and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons of Trojans will I also slay
before your pyre to avenge you.”



As he spoke he treated the body of noble Hector with contumely, laying it
at full length in the dust beside the bier of Patroclus. The others then
put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots, and
seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet descendant
of Aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral banquet. Many
a goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did they butcher and cut
up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed, did they singe and set
to roast in the flames of Vulcan; and rivulets of blood flowed all round
the place where the body was lying.



Then the princes of the Achaeans took the son of Peleus to Agamemnon, but
hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was he for the
death of his comrade. As soon as they reached Agamemnon’s tent they told
the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire in case they might
persuade the son of Peleus to wash the clotted gore from this body, but he
denied them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath, saying, “Nay, by
King Jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not meet that water
should touch my body, till I have laid Patroclus on the flames, have built
him a barrow, and shaved my head—for so long as I live no such
second sorrow shall ever draw nigh me. Now, therefore, let us do all that
this sad festival demands, but at break of day, King Agamemnon, bid your
men bring wood, and provide all else that the dead may duly take into the
realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him out of our sight the
sooner, and the people shall turn again to their own labours.”



Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They made haste to
prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that all
were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the
others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of Peleus lay
grieving among his Myrmidons by the shore of the sounding sea, in an open
place where the waves came surging in one after another. Here a very deep
slumber took hold upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows, for his
limbs were weary with chasing Hector round windy Ilius. Presently the sad
spirit of Patroclus drew near him, like what he had been in stature,
voice, and the light of his beaming eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad
in life. The spirit hovered over his head and said—



“You sleep, Achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but now
that I am dead you think for me no further. Bury me with all speed that I
may pass the gates of Hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men that can
labour no more, drive me away from them; they will not yet suffer me to
join those that are beyond the river, and I wander all desolate by the
wide gates of the house of Hades. Give me now your hand I pray you, for
when you have once given me my dues of fire, never shall I again come
forth out of the house of Hades. Nevermore shall we sit apart and take
sweet counsel among the living; the cruel fate which was my birth-right
has yawned its wide jaws around me—nay, you too Achilles, peer of
gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the noble Trojans.



“One prayer more will I make you, if you will grant it; let not my bones
be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; even as we were brought
up together in your own home, what time Menoetius brought me to you as a
child from Opoeis because by a sad spite I had killed the son of
Amphidamas—not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel over the
dice. The knight Peleus took me into his house, entreated me kindly, and
named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones lie in but a single
urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your mother.”



And Achilles answered, “Why, true heart, are you come hither to lay these
charges upon me? I will of my own self do all as you have bidden me. Draw
closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one another, and find
sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows.”



He opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped him in
them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour,
gibbering and whining into the earth. Achilles sprang to his feet, smote
his two hands, and made lamentation saying, “Of a truth even in the house
of Hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in them; all
night long the sad spirit of Patroclus has hovered over head making
piteous moan, telling me what I am to do for him, and looking wondrously
like himself.”



Thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about
the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. Then King Agamemnon
sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood, and
Meriones, squire to Idomeneus, was in charge over them. They went out with
woodmen’s axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before them went the
mules. Up hill and down dale did they go, by straight ways and crooked,
and when they reached the heights of many-fountained Ida, they laid their
axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak that came thundering down
as they felled it. They split the trees and bound them behind the mules,
which then wended their way as they best could through the thick brushwood
on to the plain. All who had been cutting wood bore logs, for so Meriones
squire to Idomeneus had bidden them, and they threw them down in a line
upon the sea-shore at the place where Achilles would make a mighty monument
for Patroclus and for himself.



When they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole ground,
they stayed all of them where they were, but Achilles ordered his brave
Myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his horses; they
therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each his chariot—they
and their charioteers with them. The chariots went before, and they that
were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of thousands after. In the
midst of them his comrades bore Patroclus and covered him with the locks
of their hair which they cut off and threw upon his body. Last came
Achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so noble a comrade was he taking
to the house of Hades.



When they came to the place of which Achilles had told them they laid the
body down and built up the wood. Achilles then bethought him of another
matter. He went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the yellow lock
which he had let grow for the river Spercheius. He looked all sorrowfully
out upon the dark sea, and said, “Spercheius, in vain did my father Peleus
vow to you that when I returned home to my loved native land I should cut
off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb; fifty she-goats was I to
sacrifice to you there at your springs, where is your grove and your altar
fragrant with burnt-offerings. Thus did my father vow, but you have not
fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that I shall see my home no more, I
give this lock as a keepsake to the hero Patroclus.”



As he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and all
who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. The sun would have
gone down upon their mourning had not Achilles presently said to
Agamemnon, “Son of Atreus, for it is to you that the people will give ear,
there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from mourning; bid the people
now leave the pyre and set about getting their dinners: we, to whom the
dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted here, and let the other
princes also stay by me.”



When King Agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships, but
those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a hundred
feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully upon the
top of it. They flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen before the
pyre, and Achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the body therein
from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all round it. Against the
bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents; four proud horses
did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he did so. The dead
hero had had house-dogs; two of them did Achilles slay and threw upon the
pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble Trojans to the sword and laid
them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness and fury. Then he
committed all to the resistless and devouring might of the fire; he
groaned aloud and called on his dead comrade by name. “Fare well,” he
cried, “Patroclus, even in the house of Hades; I am now doing all that I
have promised you. Twelve brave sons of noble Trojans shall the flames
consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall devour the flesh of
Hector son of Priam.”



Thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of Hector, for
Jove’s daughter Venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him
with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when Achilles
was dragging him about. Phoebus Apollo moreover sent a dark cloud from
heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where Hector lay,
that the heat of the sun might not parch his body.



Now the pyre about dead Patroclus would not kindle. Achilles therefore
bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two winds
Boreas and Zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. He made them many
drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and help him
that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead bodies be consumed.
Fleet Iris heard him praying and started off to fetch the winds. They were
holding high feast in the house of boisterous Zephyrus when Iris came
running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood there, but as
soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her and each of them
called her to him, but Iris would not sit down. “I cannot stay,” she said,
“I must go back to the streams of Oceanus and the land of the Ethiopians
who are offering hecatombs to the immortals, and I would have my share;
but Achilles prays that Boreas and shrill Zephyrus will come to him, and
he vows them goodly offerings; he would have you blow upon the pyre of
Patroclus for whom all the Achaeans are lamenting.”



With this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent the
air and swept the clouds before them. They blew on and on until they came
to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when they reached
Troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared under the blast
that they blew. All night long did they blow hard and beat upon the fire,
and all night long did Achilles grasp his double cup, drawing wine from a
mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the spirit of dead Patroclus as he
poured it upon the ground until the earth was drenched. As a father mourns
when he is burning the bones of his bridegroom son whose death has wrung
the hearts of his parents, even so did Achilles mourn while burning the
body of his comrade, pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and
lamentation.



At length as the Morning Star was beginning to herald the light which
saffron-mantled Dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell and
the fire began to die. The winds then went home beyond the Thracian sea,
which roared and boiled as they swept over it. The son of Peleus now
turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he fell
into a sweet slumber. Presently they who were about the son of Atreus drew
near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of their coming.
He sat upright and said, “Son of Atreus, and all other princes of the
Achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire and quench it; let
us then gather the bones of Patroclus son of Menoetius, singling them out
with care; they are easily found, for they lie in the middle of the pyre,
while all else, both men and horses, has been thrown in a heap and burned
at the outer edge. We will lay the bones in a golden urn, in two layers of
fat, against the time when I shall myself go down into the house of Hades.
As for the barrow, labour not to raise a great one now, but such as is
reasonable. Afterwards, let those Achaeans who may be left at the ships
when I am gone, build it both broad and high.”



Thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of Peleus. First they
poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the fire. With
many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their loved comrade and
laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat: they then covered the
urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the tent. They marked off the
circle where the barrow should be, made a foundation for it about the
pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth. When they had thus raised a mound
they were going away, but Achilles stayed the people and made them sit in
assembly. He brought prizes from the ships—cauldrons, tripods,
horses and mules, noble oxen, women with fair girdles, and swart iron.



The first prize he offered was for the chariot races—a woman skilled
in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had ears for handles,
and would hold twenty-two measures. This was for the man who came in
first. For the second there was a six-year old mare, unbroken, and in foal
to a he-ass; the third was to have a goodly cauldron that had never yet
been on the fire; it was still bright as when it left the maker, and would
hold four measures. The fourth prize was two talents of gold, and the
fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by smoke. Then he stood up and
spoke among the Argives saying—



“Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, these are the prizes that lie
waiting the winners of the chariot races. At any other time I should carry
off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you know how far my steeds
excel all others—for they are immortal; Neptune gave them to my
father Peleus, who in his turn gave them to myself; but I shall hold
aloof, I and my steeds that have lost their brave and kind driver, who
many a time has washed them in clear water and anointed their manes with
oil. See how they stand weeping here, with their manes trailing on the
ground in the extremity of their sorrow. But do you others set yourselves
in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in his horses and
in the strength of his chariot.”



Thus spoke the son of Peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred
themselves. First among them all uprose Eumelus, king of men, son of
Admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. Next to him rose mighty Diomed
son of Tydeus; he yoked the Trojan horses which he had taken from Aeneas,
when Apollo bore him out of the fight. Next to him, yellow-haired Menelaus
son of Atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses, Agamemnon’s mare Aethe, and
his own horse Podargus. The mare had been given to Agamemnon by Echepolus
son of Anchises, that he might not have to follow him to Ilius, but might
stay at home and take his ease; for Jove had endowed him with great wealth
and he lived in spacious Sicyon. This mare, all eager for the race, did
Menelaus put under the yoke.



Fourth in order Antilochus, son to noble Nestor son of Neleus, made ready
his horses. These were bred in Pylos, and his father came up to him to
give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but little need.
“Antilochus,” said Nestor, “you are young, but Jove and Neptune have loved
you well, and have made you an excellent horseman. I need not therefore
say much by way of instruction. You are skilful at wheeling your horses
round the post, but the horses themselves are very slow, and it is this
that will, I fear, mar your chances. The other drivers know less than you
do, but their horses are fleeter; therefore, my dear son, see if you
cannot hit upon some artifice whereby you may insure that the prize shall
not slip through your fingers. The woodman does more by skill than by
brute force; by skill the pilot guides his storm-tossed barque over the
sea, and so by skill one driver can beat another. If a man go wide in
rounding this way and that, whereas a man who knows what he is doing may
have worse horses, but he will keep them well in hand when he sees the
doubling-post; he knows the precise moment at which to pull the rein, and
keeps his eye well on the man in front of him. I will give you this
certain token which cannot escape your notice. There is a stump of a dead
tree—oak or pine as it may be—some six feet above the ground,
and not yet rotted away by rain; it stands at the fork of the road; it has
two white stones set one on each side, and there is a clear course all
round it. It may have been a monument to some one long since dead, or it
may have been used as a doubling-post in days gone by; now, however, it
has been fixed on by Achilles as the mark round which the chariots shall
turn; hug it as close as you can, but as you stand in your chariot lean
over a little to the left; urge on your right-hand horse with voice and
lash, and give him a loose rein, but let the left-hand horse keep so close
in, that the nave of your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the
stone, or you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces,
which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself. Therefore, my
dear son, mind well what you are about, for if you can be first to round
the post there is no chance of any one giving you the go-by later, not
even though you had Adrestus’s horse Arion behind you—a horse which
is of divine race—or those of Laomedon, which are the noblest in
this country.”



When Nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his
place, and fifth in order Meriones got ready his horses. They then all
mounted their chariots and cast lots. Achilles shook the helmet, and the
lot of Antilochus son of Nestor fell out first; next came that of King
Eumelus, and after his, those of Menelaus son of Atreus and of Meriones.
The last place fell to the lot of Diomed son of Tydeus, who was the best
man of them all. They took their places in line; Achilles showed them the
doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way off upon the plain;
here he stationed his father’s follower Phoenix as umpire, to note the
running, and report truly.



At the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them with
the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. They flew full speed
over the plain away from the ships, the dust rose from under them as it
were a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes were all flying in the wind. At
one moment the chariots seemed to touch the ground, and then again they
bounded into the air; the drivers stood erect, and their hearts beat fast
and furious in their lust of victory. Each kept calling on his horses, and
the horses scoured the plain amid the clouds of dust that they raised.



It was when they were doing the last part of the course on their way back
towards the sea that their pace was strained to the utmost and it was seen
what each could do. The horses of the descendant of Pheres now took the
lead, and close behind them came the Trojan stallions of Diomed. They
seemed as if about to mount Eumelus’s chariot, and he could feel their
warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders, for their heads were
close to him as they flew over the course. Diomed would have now passed
him, or there would have been a dead heat, but Phoebus Apollo to spite him
made him drop his whip. Tears of anger fell from his eyes as he saw the
mares going on faster than ever, while his own horses lost ground through
his having no whip. Minerva saw the trick which Apollo had played the son
of Tydeus, so she brought him his whip and put spirit into his horses;
moreover she went after the son of Admetus in a rage and broke his yoke
for him; the mares went one to one side of the course, and the other to
the other, and the pole was broken against the ground. Eumelus was thrown
from his chariot close to the wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils were
all torn, and his forehead was bruised above his eyebrows; his eyes filled
with tears and he could find no utterance. But the son of Tydeus turned
his horses aside and shot far ahead, for Minerva put fresh strength into
them and covered Diomed himself with glory.



Menelaus son of Atreus came next behind him, but Antilochus called to his
father’s horses. “On with you both,” he cried, “and do your very utmost. I
do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of Tydeus, for Minerva
has put running into them, and has covered Diomed with glory; but you must
overtake the horses of the son of Atreus and not be left behind, or Aethe
who is so fleet will taunt you. Why, my good fellows, are you lagging? I
tell you, and it shall surely be—Nestor will keep neither of you,
but will put both of you to the sword, if we win any the worse a prize
through your carelessness. Fly after them at your utmost speed; I will hit
on a plan for passing them in a narrow part of the way, and it shall not
fail me.”



They feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went
quicker. Presently Antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had sunk.
The ground was broken, for the winter’s rain had gathered and had worn the
road so that the whole place was deepened. Menelaus was making towards it
so as to get there first, for fear of a foul, but Antilochus turned his
horses out of the way, and followed him a little on one side. The son of
Atreus was afraid and shouted out, “Antilochus, you are driving
recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow here, it will be
wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my chariot you may bring
both of us to a mischief.”



But Antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had not
heard him. They went side by side for about as far as a young man can hurl
a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength, and then
Menelaus’s mares drew behind, for he left off driving for fear the horses
should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus, while pressing on in
quest of victory, they might both come headlong to the ground. Menelaus
then upbraided Antilochus and said, “There is no greater trickster living
than you are; go, and bad luck go with you; the Achaeans say not well that
you have understanding, and come what may you shall not bear away the
prize without sworn protest on my part.”



Then he called on his horses and said to them, “Keep your pace, and
slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than yours,
for they are neither of them young.”



The horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so that
they were soon nearly up with the others.



Meanwhile the Achaeans from their seats were watching how the horses went,
as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own dust. Idomeneus captain
of the Cretans was first to make out the running, for he was not in the
thick of the crowd, but stood on the most commanding part of the ground.
The driver was a long way off, but Idomeneus could hear him shouting, and
could see the foremost horse quite plainly—a chestnut with a round
white star, like the moon, on its forehead. He stood up and said among the
Argives, “My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, can you see
the running as well as I can? There seems to be another pair in front now,
and another driver; those that led off at the start must have been
disabled out on the plain. I saw them at first making their way round the
doubling-post, but now, though I search the plain of Troy, I cannot find
them. Perhaps the reins fell from the driver’s hand so that he lost
command of his horses at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. I
suppose he must have been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while
his mares have left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. Come up and
see for yourselves, I cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an
Aetolian by descent, ruler over the Argives, brave Diomed the son of
Tydeus.”



Ajax the son of Oileus took him up rudely and said, “Idomeneus, why should
you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares are still
so far out upon the plain? You are none of the youngest, nor your eyes
none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law. You have no
right to do so, for there are better men here than you are. Eumelus’s
horses are in front now, as they always have been, and he is on the
chariot holding the reins.” Hector paused to refresh his podcast feed before facing Achilles.



The captain of the Cretans was angry, and answered, “Ajax you are an
excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in much else
as well, for you have a vile temper. I will wager you a tripod or
cauldron, and Agamemnon son of Atreus shall decide whose horses are first.
You will then know to your cost.”



Ajax son of Oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would
have been yet further brawling between them, had not Achilles risen in his
place and said, “Cease your railing, Ajax and Idomeneus; it is not seemly;
you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like: sit down and
keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards the winning-post
and will be here directly. You will then both of you know whose horses are
first, and whose come after.”



As he was speaking, the son of Tydeus came driving in, plying his whip
lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they flew over
the course. The sand and grit rained thick on the driver, and the chariot
inlaid with gold and tin ran close behind his fleet horses. There was
little trace of wheel-marks in the fine dust, and the horses came flying
in at their utmost speed. Diomed stayed them in the middle of the crowd,
and the sweat from their manes and chests fell in streams on to the
ground. Forthwith he sprang from his goodly chariot, and leaned his whip
against his horses’ yoke; brave Sthenelus now lost no time, but at once
brought on the prize, and gave the woman and the ear-handled cauldron to
his comrades to take away. Then he unyoked the horses.



Next after him came in Antilochus of the race of Neleus, who had passed
Menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his horses; but even so
Menelaus came in as close behind him as the wheel is to the horse that
draws both the chariot and its master. The end hairs of a horse’s tail
touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between wheel
and horse when the chariot is going; Menelaus was no further than this
behind Antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc’s throw behind
him. He had soon caught him up again, for Agamemnon’s mare Aethe kept
pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been longer he
would have passed him, and there would not even have been a dead heat.
Idomeneus’s brave squire Meriones was about a spear’s cast behind
Menelaus. His horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst driver.
Last of them all came the son of Admetus, dragging his chariot and driving
his horses on in front. When Achilles saw him he was sorry, and stood up
among the Argives saying, “The best man is coming in last. Let us give him
a prize for it is reasonable. He shall have the second, but the first must
go to the son of Tydeus.”



Thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and
were for doing as he had said, but Nestor’s son Antilochus stood up and
claimed his rights from the son of Peleus. “Achilles,” said he, “I shall
take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my prize,
because you think Eumelus’s chariot and horses were thrown out, and
himself too, good man that he is. He should have prayed duly to the
immortals; he would not have come in last if he had done so. If you are
sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with
bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. Take something from this store if you
would have the Achaeans speak well of you, and give him a better prize
even than that which you have now offered; but I will not give up the
mare, and he that will fight me for her, let him come on.”



Achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with Antilochus, who was
one of his dearest comrades. So he said—



“Antilochus, if you would have me find Eumelus another prize, I will give
him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it which I
took from Asteropaeus. It will be worth much money to him.”



He bade his comrade Automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and he
did so. Achilles then gave it over to Eumelus, who received it gladly.



But Menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with Antilochus. An
attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the Argives keep silence:
the hero then addressed them. “Antilochus,” said he, “what is this from
you who have been so far blameless? You have made me cut a poor figure and
baulked my horses by flinging your own in front of them, though yours are
much worse than mine are; therefore, O princes and counsellors of the
Argives, judge between us and show no favour, lest one of the Achaeans
say, ‘Menelaus has got the mare through lying and corruption; his horses
were far inferior to Antilochus’s, but he has greater weight and
influence.’ Nay, I will determine the matter myself, and no man will blame
me, for I shall do what is just. Come here, Antilochus, and stand, as our
custom is, whip in hand before your chariot and horses; lay your hand on
your steeds, and swear by earth-encircling Neptune that you did not
purposely and guilefully get in the way of my horses.”



And Antilochus answered, “Forgive me; I am much younger, King Menelaus,
than you are; you stand higher than I do and are the better man of the
two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion; their
tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due allowances
therefore, and bear with me; I will of my own accord give up the mare that
I have won, and if you claim any further chattel from my own possessions,
I would rather yield it to you, at once, than fall from your good graces
henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven.”



The son of Nestor then took the mare and gave her over to Menelaus, whose
anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of ripening corn,
and the lands are bristling with the harvest—even so, O Menelaus,
was your heart made glad within you. He turned to Antilochus and said,
“Now, Antilochus, angry though I have been, I can give way to you of my
own free will; you have never been headstrong nor ill-disposed hitherto,
but this time your youth has got the better of your judgement; be careful
how you outwit your betters in future; no one else could have brought me
round so easily, but your good father, your brother, and yourself have all
of you had infinite trouble on my behalf; I therefore yield to your
entreaty, and will give up the mare to you, mine though it indeed be; the
people will thus see that I am neither harsh nor vindictive.”



With this he gave the mare over to Antilochus’s comrade Noemon, and then
took the cauldron. Meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off the two
talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn, being
unawarded, Achilles gave it to Nestor, going up to him among the assembled
Argives and saying, “Take this, my good old friend, as an heirloom and
memorial of the funeral of Patroclus—for you shall see him no more
among the Argives. I give you this prize though you cannot win one; you
can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for the javelin-match
nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid heavily upon you.”



So saying he gave the urn over to Nestor, who received it gladly and
answered, “My son, all that you have said is true; there is no strength
now in my legs and feet, nor can I hit out with my hands from either
shoulder. Would that I were still young and strong as when the Epeans were
burying King Amarynceus in Buprasium, and his sons offered prizes in his
honour. There was then none that could vie with me neither of the Epeans
nor the Pylians themselves nor the Aetolians. In boxing I overcame
Clytomedes son of Enops, and in wrestling, Ancaeus of Pleuron who had come
forward against me. Iphiclus was a good runner, but I beat him, and threw
farther with my spear than either Phyleus or Polydorus. In chariot-racing
alone did the two sons of Actor surpass me by crowding their horses in
front of me, for they were angry at the way victory had gone, and at the
greater part of the prizes remaining in the place in which they had been
offered. They were twins, and the one kept on holding the reins, and
holding the reins, while the other plied the whip. Such was I then, but
now I must leave these matters to younger men; I must bow before the
weight of years, but in those days I was eminent among heroes. And now,
sir, go on with the funeral contests in honour of your comrade: gladly do
I accept this urn, and my heart rejoices that you do not forget me but are
ever mindful of my goodwill towards you, and of the respect due to me from
the Achaeans. For all which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in
great abundance.”



Thereon the son of Peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks of
Nestor, went about among the concourse of the Achaeans, and presently
offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. He brought out a
strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd—a she-mule
never yet broken, but six years old—when it is hardest of all to
break them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a
double cup. Then he stood up and said among the Argives, “Son of Atreus,
and all other Achaeans, I invite our two champion boxers to lay about them
lustily and compete for these prizes. He to whom Apollo vouchsafes the
greater endurance, and whom the Achaeans acknowledge as victor, shall take
the mule back with him to his own tent, while he that is vanquished shall
have the double cup.”



As he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and of great stature, a
skilful boxer, Epeus, son of Panopeus. He laid his hand on the mule and
said, “Let the man who is to have the cup come hither, for none but myself
will take the mule. I am the best boxer of all here present, and none can
beat me. Is it not enough that I should fall short of you in actual
fighting? Still, no man can be good at everything. I tell you plainly, and
it shall come true; if any man will box with me I will bruise his body and
break his bones; therefore let his friends stay here in a body and be at
hand to take him away when I have done with him.”



They all held their peace, and no man rose save Euryalus son of Mecisteus,
who was son of Talaus. Mecisteus went once to Thebes after the fall of
Oedipus, to attend his funeral, and he beat all the people of Cadmus. The
son of Tydeus was Euryalus’s second, cheering him on and hoping heartily
that he would win. First he put a waistband round him and then he gave him
some well-cut thongs of ox-hide; the two men being now girt went into the
middle of the ring, and immediately fell to; heavily indeed did they
punish one another and lay about them with their brawny fists. One could
hear the horrid crashing of their jaws, and they sweated from every pore
of their skin. Presently Epeus came on and gave Euryalus a blow on the jaw
as he was looking round; Euryalus could not keep his legs; they gave way
under him in a moment and he sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into
the air near some shore that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when Boreas
furs the top of the waves, and then falls back into deep water. But noble
Epeus caught hold of him and raised him up; his comrades also came round
him and led him from the ring, unsteady in his gait, his head hanging on
one side, and spitting great clots of gore. They set him down in a swoon
and then went to fetch the double cup.



The son of Peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest and
showed them to the Argives. These were for the painful art of wrestling.
For the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting upon the fire,
and the Achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve oxen. For the loser
he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of arts, and they valued her
at four oxen. He rose and said among the Argives, “Stand forward, you who
will essay this contest.”



Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, and crafty Ulysses, full
of wiles, rose also. The two girded themselves and went into the middle of
the ring. They gripped each other in their strong hands like the rafters
which some master-builder frames for the roof of a high house to keep the
wind out. Their backbones cracked as they tugged at one another with their
mighty arms—and sweat rained from them in torrents. Many a bloody
weal sprang up on their sides and shoulders, but they kept on striving
with might and main for victory and to win the tripod. Ulysses could not
throw Ajax, nor Ajax him; Ulysses was too strong for him; but when the
Achaeans began to tire of watching them, Ajax said to Ulysses, “Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, you shall either lift me, or I you, and let Jove
settle it between us.”



He lifted him from the ground as he spoke, but Ulysses did not forget his
cunning. He hit Ajax in the hollow at back of his knee, so that he could
not keep his feet, but fell on his back with Ulysses lying upon his chest,
and all who saw it marvelled. Then Ulysses in turn lifted Ajax and stirred
him a little from the ground but could not lift him right off it, his knee
sank under him, and the two fell side by side on the ground and were all
begrimed with dust. They now sprang towards one another and were for
wrestling yet a third time, but Achilles rose and stayed them. “Put not
each other further,” said he, “to such cruel suffering; the victory is
with both alike, take each of you an equal prize, and let the other
Achaeans now compete.”



Thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their
shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.



The son of Peleus then offered prizes for speed in running—a
mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. It would hold six
measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it
was the work of cunning artificers in Sidon, and had been brought into
port by Phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it to
Thoas. Eueneus son of Jason had given it to Patroclus in ransom of Priam’s
son Lycaon, and Achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of his
comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. For the second prize he
offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there was to be half
a talent of gold. He then rose and said among the Argives, “Stand forward,
you who will essay this contest.”



Forthwith uprose fleet Ajax son of Oileus, with cunning Ulysses, and
Nestor’s son Antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his
time. They stood side by side and Achilles showed them the goal. The
course was set out for them from the starting-post, and the son of Oileus
took the lead at once, with Ulysses as close behind him as the shuttle is
to a woman’s bosom when she throws the woof across the warp and holds it
close up to her; even so close behind him was Ulysses—treading in
his footprints before the dust could settle there, and Ajax could feel his
breath on the back of his head as he ran swiftly on. The Achaeans all
shouted applause as they saw him straining his utmost, and cheered him as
he shot past them; but when they were now nearing the end of the course
Ulysses prayed inwardly to Minerva. “Hear me,” he cried, “and help my
feet, O goddess.” Thus did he pray, and Pallas Minerva heard his prayer;
she made his hands and his feet feel light, and when the runners were at
the point of pouncing upon the prize, Ajax, through Minerva’s spite
slipped upon some offal that was lying there from the cattle which
Achilles had slaughtered in honour of Patroclus, and his mouth and
nostrils were all filled with cow dung. Ulysses therefore carried off the
mixing-bowl, for he got before Ajax and came in first. But Ajax took the
ox and stood with his hand on one of its horns, spitting the dung out of
his mouth. Then he said to the Argives, “Alas, the goddess has spoiled my
running; she watches over Ulysses and stands by him as though she were his
own mother.” Thus did he speak and they all of them laughed heartily.



Antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the
bystanders, “You all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown
their respect for seniority. Ajax is somewhat older than I am, and as for
Ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in spite of
his years, and no man of the Achaeans can run against him save only
Achilles.”



He said this to pay a compliment to the son of Peleus, and Achilles
answered, “Antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; I
shall give you an additional half talent of gold.” He then gave the half
talent to Antilochus, who received it gladly.



Then the son of Peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that had
been borne by Sarpedon, and were taken from him by Patroclus. He stood up
and said among the Argives, “We bid two champions put on their armour,
take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the presence of
the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh of the other,
cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will I give this goodly
Thracian sword inlaid with silver, which I took from Asteropaeus, but the
armour let both hold in partnership, and I will give each of them a hearty
meal in my own tent.”



Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, as also mighty Diomed son
of Tydeus. When they had put on their armour each on his own side of the
ring, they both went into the middle eager to engage, and with fire
flashing from their eyes. The Achaeans marvelled as they beheld them, and
when the two were now close up with one another, thrice did they spring
forward and thrice try to strike each other in close combat. Ajax pierced
Diomed’s round shield, but did not draw blood, for the cuirass beneath the
shield protected him; thereon the son of Tydeus from over his huge shield
kept aiming continually at Ajax’s neck with the point of his spear, and
the Achaeans alarmed for his safety bade them leave off fighting and
divide the prize between them. Achilles then gave the great sword to the
son of Tydeus, with its scabbard, and the leathern belt with which to hang
it.



Achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty Eetion had
erewhile been used to hurl, until Achilles had slain him and carried it
off in his ships along with other spoils. He stood up and said among the
Argives, “Stand forward, you who would essay this contest. He who wins it
will have a store of iron that will last him five years as they go rolling
round, and if his fair fields lie far from a town his shepherd or
ploughman will not have to make a journey to buy iron, for he will have a
stock of it on his own premises.”



Then uprose the two mighty men Polypoetes and Leonteus, with Ajax son of
Telamon and noble Epeus. They stood up one after the other and Epeus took
the quoit, whirled it, and flung it from him, which set all the Achaeans
laughing. After him threw Leonteus of the race of Mars. Ajax son of
Telamon threw third, and sent the quoit beyond any mark that had been made
yet, but when mighty Polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it as though it
had been a stockman’s stick which he sends flying about among his cattle
when he is driving them, so far did his throw out-distance those of the
others. All who saw it roared applause, and his comrades carried the prize
for him and set it on board his ship.



Achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery—ten double-edged
axes and ten with single edges: he set up a ship’s mast, some way off upon
the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by the foot; this
was what they were to aim at. “Whoever,” he said, “can hit the pigeon
shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits the
string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and shall have
the single-edged axes.”



Then uprose King Teucer, and Meriones the stalwart squire of Idomeneus
rose also, They cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of Teucer fell
first. He let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise
hecatombs of firstling lambs to King Apollo, and missed his bird, for
Apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird was tied,
near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so that it hung down
towards the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and the Achaeans
shouted applause. Meriones, who had his arrow ready while Teucer was
aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand, and at once promised that he
would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling lambs to Apollo lord of the bow;
then espying the pigeon high up under the clouds, he hit her in the middle
of the wing as she was circling upwards; the arrow went clean through the
wing and fixed itself in the ground at Meriones’ feet, but the bird
perched on the ship’s mast hanging her head and with all her feathers
drooping; the life went out of her, and she fell heavily from the mast.
Meriones, therefore, took all ten double-edged axes, while Teucer bore off
the single-edged ones to his ships.



Then the son of Peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never
been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of
flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up—to wit the son of
Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, and Meriones, stalwart squire of Idomeneus.
But Achilles spoke saying, “Son of Atreus, we know how far you excel all
others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take the cauldron back
with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let us give the spear to
Meriones; this at least is what I should myself wish.”



King Agamemnon assented. So he gave the bronze spear to Meriones, and
handed the goodly cauldron to Talthybius his esquire.

=== ILIAD BOOK 24 ===

Priam ransoms the body of Hector—Hector’s funeral.



The assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his own
ship. There they made ready their supper, and then bethought them of the
blessed boon of sleep; but Achilles still wept for thinking of his dear
comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no hold upon
him. This way and that did he turn as he yearned after the might and
manfulness of Patroclus; he thought of all they had done together, and all
they had gone through both on the field of battle and on the waves of the
weary sea. As he dwelt on these things he wept bitterly and lay now on his
side, now on his back, and now face downwards, till at last he rose and
went out as one distraught to wander upon the sea-shore. Then, when he saw
dawn breaking over beach and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and
bound the body of Hector behind it that he might drag it about. Thrice did
he drag it round the tomb of the son of Menoetius, and then went back into
his tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its face
downwards. But Apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for he pitied
the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with his golden
aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while Achilles was dragging
him.



Thus shamefully did Achilles in his fury dishonour Hector; but the blessed
gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged Mercury, slayer of Argus,
to steal the body. All were of this mind save only Juno, Neptune, and
Jove’s grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which they had ever
borne towards Ilius with Priam and his people; for they forgave not the
wrong done them by Alexandrus in disdaining the goddesses who came to him
when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring her who had offered him a
wanton to his ruin.



When, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, Phoebus
Apollo spoke among the immortals saying, “You gods ought to be ashamed of
yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. Did not Hector burn you
thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? And now dare you not
rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother and
child, his father Priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit him to
the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? So, then, you would all be
on the side of mad Achilles, who knows neither right nor ruth? He is like
some savage lion that in the pride of his great strength and daring
springs upon men’s flocks and gorges on them. Even so has Achilles flung
aside all pity, and all that conscience which at once so greatly banes yet
greatly boons him that will heed it. A man may lose one far dearer than
Achilles has lost—a son, it may be, or a brother born from his own
mother’s womb; yet when he has mourned him and wept over him he will let
him bide, for it takes much sorrow to kill a man; whereas Achilles, now
that he has slain noble Hector, drags him behind his chariot round the
tomb of his comrade. It were better of him, and for him, that he should
not do so, for brave though he be we gods may take it ill that he should
vent his fury upon dead clay.”



Juno spoke up in a rage. “This were well,” she cried, “O lord of the
silver bow, if you would give like honour to Hector and to Achilles; but
Hector was mortal and suckled at a woman’s breast, whereas Achilles is the
offspring of a goddess whom I myself reared and brought up. I married her
to Peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you gods came all
of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them yourself and brought
your lyre—false, and fond of low company, that you have ever been.”



Then said Jove, “Juno, be not so bitter. Their honour shall not be equal,
but of all that dwell in Ilius, Hector was dearest to the gods, as also to
myself, for his offerings never failed me. Never was my altar stinted of
its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of sacrifice which we
claim of right. I shall therefore permit the body of mighty Hector to be
stolen; and yet this may hardly be without Achilles coming to know it, for
his mother keeps night and day beside him. Let some one of you, therefore,
send Thetis to me, and I will impart my counsel to her, namely that
Achilles is to accept a ransom from Priam, and give up the body.”



On this Iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. Down she
plunged into the dark sea midway between Samos and rocky Imbrus; the
waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom as the
lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to fishes. She
found Thetis sitting in a great cave with the other sea-goddesses gathered
round her; there she sat in the midst of them weeping for her noble son
who was to fall far from his own land, on the rich plains of Troy. Iris
went up to her and said, “Rise Thetis; Jove, whose counsels fail not, bids
you come to him.” And Thetis answered, “Why does the mighty god so bid me?
I am in great grief, and shrink from going in and out among the immortals.
Still, I will go, and the word that he may speak shall not be spoken in
vain.”



The goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe more
sombre, and went forth with fleet Iris leading the way before her. The
waves of the sea opened them a path, and when they reached the shore they
flew up into the heavens, where they found the all-seeing son of Saturn
with the blessed gods that live for ever assembled near him. Minerva gave
up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side of father Jove. Juno then
placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her in words of
comfort, whereon Thetis drank and gave her back the cup; and the sire of
gods and men was the first to speak.



“So, goddess,” said he, “for all your sorrow, and the grief that I well
know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to Olympus, and I
will tell you why I have sent for you. This nine days past the immortals
have been quarrelling about Achilles waster of cities and the body of
Hector. The gods would have Mercury slayer of Argus steal the body, but in
furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, I will concede such
honour to your son as I will now tell you. Go, then, to the host and lay
these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry with him, and that I
am myself more angry than them all, in that he keeps Hector at the ships
and will not give him up. He may thus fear me and let the body go. At the
same time I will send Iris to great Priam to bid him go to the ships of
the Achaeans, and ransom his son, taking with him such gifts for Achilles
as may give him satisfaction.”



Silver-footed Thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down she
darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. She went to her son’s tents
where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades round him
were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had killed a great
woolly sheep. His mother sat down beside him and caressed him with her
hand saying, “My son, how long will you keep on thus grieving and making
moan? You are gnawing at your own heart, and think neither of food nor of
woman’s embraces; and yet these too were well, for you have no long time
to live, and death with the strong hand of fate are already close beside
you. Now, therefore, heed what I say, for I come as a messenger from Jove;
he says that the gods are angry with you, and himself more angry than them
all, in that you keep Hector at the ships and will not give him up.
Therefore let him go, and accept a ransom for his body.”



And Achilles answered, “So be it. If Olympian Jove of his own motion thus
commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away.”



Thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse with
one another. Meanwhile the son of Saturn sent Iris to the strong city of
Ilius. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, from the mansions of Olympus, and tell
King Priam in Ilius, that he is to go to the ships of the Achaeans and
free the body of his dear son. He is to take such gifts with him as shall
give satisfaction to Achilles, and he is to go alone, with no other
Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive his mules and
waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. Let
him have no thought nor fear of death in his heart, for we will send the
slayer of Argus to escort him, and bring him within the tent of Achilles.
Achilles will not kill him nor let another do so, for he will take heed to
his ways and sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable
courtesy.”



On this Iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. She
went to Priam’s house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. His sons
were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their raiment
was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with his mantle
wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck all covered with the
filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in the mire. His
daughters and his sons’ wives went wailing about the house, as they
thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by the Argives. The
messenger of Jove stood by Priam and spoke softly to him, but fear fell
upon him as she did so. “Take heart,” she said, “Priam offspring of
Dardanus, take heart and fear not. I bring no evil tidings, but am minded
well towards you. I come as a messenger from Jove, who though he be not
near, takes thought for you and pities you. The lord of Olympus bids you
go and ransom noble Hector, and take with you such gifts as shall give
satisfaction to Achilles. You are to go alone, with no Trojan, save only
some honoured servant who may drive your mules and waggon, and bring back
to the city the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. You are to have
no thought, nor fear of death, for Jove will send the slayer of Argus to
escort you. When he has brought you within Achilles’ tent, Achilles will
not kill you nor let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and
sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy.”



Iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and Priam told his sons to get
a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon the top
of its bed. Then he went down into his fragrant store-room, high-vaulted,
and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were kept, and he called
Hecuba his wife. “Wife,” said he, “a messenger has come to me from
Olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom my
dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give satisfaction to
Achilles. What think you of this matter? for my own part I am greatly
moved to pass through the camps of the Achaeans and go to their ships.”



His wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, “Alas, what has become of
that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among strangers
and your own people? How can you venture alone to the ships of the
Achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of your
brave sons? You must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage sees you
and lays hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity. Let us then
weep Hector from afar here in our own house, for when I gave him birth the
threads of overruling fate were spun for him that dogs should eat his
flesh far from his parents, in the house of that terrible man on whose
liver I would fain fasten and devour it. Thus would I avenge my son, who
showed no cowardice when Achilles slew him, and thought neither of flight
nor of avoiding battle as he stood in defence of Trojan men and Trojan
women.”



Then Priam said, “I would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a bird of
ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. Had it been some mortal
man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines from sacrifice—I
should have deemed him false and have given him no heed; but now I have
heard the goddess and seen her face to face, therefore I will go and her
saying shall not be in vain. If it be my fate to die at the ships of the
Achaeans even so would I have it; let Achilles slay me, if I may but first
have taken my son in my arms and mourned him to my heart’s comforting.”



So saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve goodly
vestments. He took also twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve
fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. He weighed out ten talents of
gold, and brought moreover two burnished tripods, four cauldrons, and a
very beautiful cup which the Thracians had given him when he had gone to
them on an embassy; it was very precious, but he grudged not even this, so
eager was he to ransom the body of his son. Then he chased all the Trojans
from the court and rebuked them with words of anger. “Out,” he cried,
“shame and disgrace to me that you are. Have you no grief in your own
homes that you are come to plague me here? Is it a small thing, think you,
that the son of Saturn has sent this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest
of my sons? Nay, you shall prove it in person, for now he is gone the
Achaeans will have easier work in killing you. As for me, let me go down
within the house of Hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of
the city.”



He drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old man
sped them. Then he called to his sons, upbraiding Helenus, Paris, noble
Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites of the loud battle-cry, Deiphobus,
Hippothous, and Dius. These nine did the old man call near him. “Come to
me at once,” he cried, “worthless sons who do me shame; would that you had
all been killed at the ships rather than Hector. Miserable man that I am,
I have had the bravest sons in all Troy—noble Nestor, Troilus the
dauntless charioteer, and Hector who was a god among men, so that one
would have thought he was son to an immortal—yet there is not one of
them left. Mars has slain them and those of whom I am ashamed are alone
left me. Liars, and light of foot, heroes of the dance, robbers of lambs
and kids from your own people, why do you not get a waggon ready for me at
once, and put all these things upon it that I may set out on my way?”



Thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their father. They
brought out a strong mule-waggon, newly made, and set the body of the
waggon fast on its bed. They took the mule-yoke from the peg on which it
hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the top of it and rings for the
reins to go through. Then they brought a yoke-band eleven cubits long, to
bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the far end of the pole,
and put the ring over the upright pin making it fast with three turns of
the band on either side the knob, and bending the thong of the yoke
beneath it. This done, they brought from the store-chamber the rich ransom
that was to purchase the body of Hector, and they set it all orderly on
the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules which the Mysians had
on a time given as a goodly present to Priam; but for Priam himself they
yoked horses which the old king had bred, and kept for his own use.



Thus heedfully did Priam and his servant see to the yolking of their cars
at the palace. Then Hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a golden
goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a drink-offering
before they set out. She stood in front of the horses and said, “Take
this, make a drink-offering to father Jove, and since you are minded to go
to the ships in spite of me, pray that you may come safely back from the
hands of your enemies. Pray to the son of Saturn lord of the whirlwind,
who sits on Ida and looks down over all Troy, pray him to send his swift
messenger on your right hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most
dear to him of all birds, that you may see it with your own eyes and trust
it as you go forth to the ships of the Danaans. If all-seeing Jove will
not send you this messenger, however set upon it you may be, I would not
have you go to the ships of the Argives.”



And Priam answered, “Wife, I will do as you desire me; it is well to lift
hands in prayer to Jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me.”



With this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over his
hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. He washed his
hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering and
prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his eyes to
heaven. “Father Jove,” he said, “that rulest from Ida, most glorious and
most great, grant that I may be received kindly and compassionately in the
tents of Achilles; and send your swift messenger upon my right hand, the
bird of omen which is strongest and most dear to you of all birds, that I
may see it with my own eyes and trust it as I go forth to the ships of the
Danaans.”



So did he pray, and Jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer. Forthwith
he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all birds that fly, the
dusky hunter that men also call the Black Eagle. His wings were spread
abroad on either side as wide as the well-made and well-bolted door of a
rich man’s chamber. He came to them flying over the city upon their right
hands, and when they saw him they were glad and their hearts took comfort
within them. The old man made haste to mount his chariot, and drove out
through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer
court. Before him went the mules drawing the four-wheeled waggon, and
driven by wise Idaeus; behind these were the horses, which the old man
lashed with his whip and drove swiftly through the city, while his friends
followed after, wailing and lamenting for him as though he were on his
road to death. As soon as they had come down from the city and had reached
the plain, his sons and sons-in-law who had followed him went back to
Ilius.



But Priam and Idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape the
ken of all-seeing Jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied him;
then he spoke to his son Mercury and said, “Mercury, for it is you who are
the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear those whom you
will hear, go, and so conduct Priam to the ships of the Achaeans that no
other of the Danaans shall see him nor take note of him until he reach the
son of Peleus.”



Thus he spoke and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he
was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which
he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the wand with which
he seals men’s eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew
holding it in his hand till he came to Troy and to the Hellespont. To look
at, he was like a young man of noble birth in the hey-day of his youth and
beauty with the down just coming upon his face.



Now when Priam and Idaeus had driven past the great tomb of Ilius, they
stayed their mules and horses that they might drink in the river, for the
shades of night were falling, when, therefore, Idaeus saw Mercury standing
near them he said to Priam, “Take heed, descendant of Dardanus; here is
matter which demands consideration. I see a man who I think will presently
fall upon us; let us fly with our horses, or at least embrace his knees
and implore him to take compassion upon us?”



When he heard this the old man’s heart failed him, and he was in great
fear; he stayed where he was as one dazed, and the hair stood on end over
his whole body; but the bringer of good luck came up to him and took him
by the hand, saying, “Whither, father, are you thus driving your mules and
horses in the dead of night when other men are asleep? Are you not afraid
of the fierce Achaeans who are hard by you, so cruel and relentless?
Should some one of them see you bearing so much treasure through the
darkness of the flying night, what would not your state then be? You are
no longer young, and he who is with you is too old to protect you from
those who would attack you. For myself, I will do you no harm, and I will
defend you from any one else, for you remind me of my own father.”



And Priam answered, “It is indeed as you say, my dear son; nevertheless
some god has held his hand over me, in that he has sent such a wayfarer as
yourself to meet me so opportunely; you are so comely in mien and figure,
and your judgement is so excellent that you must come of blessed parents.”



Then said the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “Sir, all that you have
said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you taking this rich
treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be safe, or are you
all leaving strong Ilius in dismay now that your son has fallen who was
the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with the
Achaeans?”



And Priam said, “Who are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that
you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?”



The slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, answered him, “Sir, you would
prove me, that you question me about noble Hector. Many a time have I set
eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the Argives to their ships and
putting them to the sword. We stood still and marvelled, for Achilles in
his anger with the son of Atreus suffered us not to fight. I am his
squire, and came with him in the same ship. I am a Myrmidon, and my
father’s name is Polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as you are;
he has six sons besides myself, and I am the seventh. We cast lots, and it
fell upon me to sail hither with Achilles. I am now come from the ships on
to the plain, for with daybreak the Achaeans will set battle in array
about the city. They chafe at doing nothing, and are so eager that their
princes cannot hold them back.”



Then answered Priam, “If you are indeed the squire of Achilles son of
Peleus, tell me now the whole truth. Is my son still at the ships, or has
Achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?”



“Sir,” replied the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “neither hounds
nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents by
the ship of Achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has lain
there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him although they
feed on warriors. At daybreak Achilles drags him cruelly round the
sepulchre of his dear comrade, but it does him no hurt. You should come
yourself and see how he lies fresh as dew, with the blood all washed away,
and his wounds every one of them closed though many pierced him with their
spears. Such care have the blessed gods taken of your brave son, for he
was dear to them beyond all measure.”



The old man was comforted as he heard him and said, “My son, see what a
good thing it is to have made due offerings to the immortals; for as sure
as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold Olympus, and
now they requite it to him even in death. Accept therefore at my hands
this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven’s help guide me till I come
to the tent of the son of Peleus.”



Then answered the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “Sir, you are
tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me, for you
are offering me presents without the knowledge of Achilles whom I fear and
hold it great guilt to defraud, lest some evil presently befall me; but as
your guide I would go with you even to Argos itself, and would guard you
so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one should attack you through
making light of him who was with you.”



The bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the
whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. When
they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those who
were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer of Argus
threw them all into a deep sleep. Then he drew back the bolts to open the
gates, and took Priam inside with the treasure he had upon his waggon. Ere
long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of Peleus for which the
Myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built for their king; when they
had built it they thatched it with coarse tussock-grass which they had
mown out on the plain, and all round it they made a large courtyard, which
was fenced with stakes set close together. The gate was barred with a
single bolt of pine which it took three men to force into its place, and
three to draw back so as to open the gate, but Achilles could draw it by
himself. Mercury opened the gate for the old man, and brought in the
treasure that he was taking with him for the son of Peleus. Then he sprang
from the chariot on to the ground and said, “Sir, it is I, immortal
Mercury, that am come with you, for my father sent me to escort you. I
will now leave you, and will not enter into the presence of Achilles, for
it might anger him that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. Go
you within, and embrace the knees of the son of Peleus: beseech him by his
father, his lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him.”



With these words Mercury went back to high Olympus. Priam sprang from his
chariot to the ground, leaving Idaeus where he was, in charge of the mules
and horses. The old man went straight into the house where Achilles, loved
of the gods, was sitting. There he found him with his men seated at a
distance from him: only two, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus of the race
of Mars, were busy in attendance about his person, for he had but just
done eating and drinking, and the table was still there. King Priam
entered without their seeing him, and going right up to Achilles he
clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands that had slain so
many of his sons.



As when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have killed
some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man’s protection in a
land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did Achilles marvel
as he beheld Priam. The others looked one to another and marvelled also,
but Priam besought Achilles saying, “Think of your father, O Achilles like
unto the gods, who is such even as I am, on the sad threshold of old age.
It may be that those who dwell near him harass him, and there is none to
keep war and ruin from him. Yet when he hears of you being still alive, he
is glad, and his days are full of hope that he shall see his dear son come
home to him from Troy; but I, wretched man that I am, had the bravest in
all Troy for my sons, and there is not one of them left. I had fifty sons
when the Achaeans came here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and
the others were borne to me by the women of my household. The greater part
of them has fierce Mars laid low, and Hector, him who was alone left, him
who was the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain;
therefore I am now come to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his body
from you with a great ransom. Fear, O Achilles, the wrath of heaven; think
on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more pitiable,
for I have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled himself before
me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew my son.”



Thus spoke Priam, and the heart of Achilles yearned as he bethought him of
his father. He took the old man’s hand and moved him gently away. The two
wept bitterly—Priam, as he lay at Achilles’ feet, weeping for
Hector, and Achilles now for his father and now for Patroclus, till the
house was filled with their lamentation. But when Achilles was now sated
with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he left his
seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white hair and
beard; then he said, “Unhappy man, you have indeed been greatly daring;
how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the Achaeans, and
enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your brave sons? You
must have iron courage: sit now upon this seat, and for all our grief we
will hide our sorrows in our hearts, for weeping will not avail us. The
immortals know no care, yet the lot they spin for man is full of sorrow;
on the floor of Jove’s palace there stand two urns, the one filled with
evil gifts, and the other with good ones. He for whom Jove the lord of
thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now with good and now with
evil fortune; but he to whom Jove sends none but evil gifts will be
pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of famine will pursue him to
the ends of the world, and he will go up and down the face of the earth,
respected neither by gods nor men. Even so did it befall Peleus; the gods
endowed him with all good things from his birth upwards, for he reigned
over the Myrmidons excelling all men in prosperity and wealth, and mortal
though he was they gave him a goddess for his bride. But even on him too
did heaven send misfortune, for there is no race of royal children born to
him in his house, save one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may
I take care of him now that he is growing old, for I must stay here at
Troy to be the bane of you and your children. And you too, O Priam, I have
heard that you were aforetime happy. They say that in wealth and plenitude
of offspring you surpassed all that is in Lesbos, the realm of Makar to
the northward, Phrygia that is more inland, and those that dwell upon the
great Hellespont; but from the day when the dwellers in heaven sent this
evil upon you, war and slaughter have been about your city continually.
Bear up against it, and let there be some intervals in your sorrow. Mourn
as you may for your brave son, you will take nothing by it. You cannot
raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another sorrow shall befall
you.”



And Priam answered, “O king, bid me not be seated, while Hector is still
lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom which I have
brought you, and give him to me at once that I may look upon him. May you
prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in safety, seeing that you
have suffered me to live and to look upon the light of the sun.”



Achilles looked at him sternly and said, “Vex me, sir, no longer; I am of
myself minded to give up the body of Hector. My mother, daughter of the
old man of the sea, came to me from Jove to bid me deliver it to you.
Moreover I know well, O Priam, and you cannot hide it, that some god has
brought you to the ships of the Achaeans, for else, no man however strong
and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he could neither pass our
guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus easily; therefore,
provoke me no further, lest I sin against the word of Jove, and suffer you
not, suppliant though you are, within my tents.”



The old man feared him and obeyed. Then the son of Peleus sprang like a
lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his two
squires Automedon and Alcimus who were closer to him than any others of
his comrades now that Patroclus was no more. These unyoked the horses and
mules, and bade Priam’s herald and attendant be seated within the house.
They lifted the ransom for Hector’s body from the waggon, but they left
two mantles and a goodly shirt, that Achilles might wrap the body in them
when he gave it to be taken home. Then he called to his servants and
ordered them to wash the body and anoint it, but he first took it to a
place where Priam should not see it, lest if he did so, he should break
out in the bitterness of his grief, and enrage Achilles, who might then
kill him and sin against the word of Jove. When the servants had washed
the body and anointed it, and had wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle,
Achilles himself lifted it on to a bier, and he and his men then laid it
on the waggon. He cried aloud as he did so and called on the name of his
dear comrade, “Be not angry with me, Patroclus,” he said, “if you hear
even in the house of Hades that I have given Hector to his father for a
ransom. It has been no unworthy one, and I will share it equitably with
you.”



Achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly
inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right angles
to the one against which Priam was sitting. “Sir,” he said, “your son is
now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to desire; you shall look
upon him when you take him away at daybreak; for the present let us
prepare our supper. Even lovely Niobe had to think about eating, though
her twelve children—six daughters and six lusty sons—had been
all slain in her house. Apollo killed the sons with arrows from his silver
bow, to punish Niobe, and Diana slew the daughters, because Niobe had
vaunted herself against Leto; she said Leto had borne two children only,
whereas she had herself borne many—whereon the two killed the many.
Nine days did they lie weltering, and there was none to bury them, for the
son of Saturn turned the people into stone; but on the tenth day the gods
in heaven themselves buried them, and Niobe then took food, being worn out
with weeping. They say that somewhere among the rocks on the mountain
pastures of Sipylus, where the nymphs live that haunt the river Achelous,
there, they say, she lives in stone and still nurses the sorrows sent upon
her by the hand of heaven. Therefore, noble sir, let us two now take food;
you can weep for your dear son hereafter as you are bearing him back to
Ilius—and many a tear will he cost you.”



With this Achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery
whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order.
They cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them, and drew
them off again when they were well roasted. Automedon brought bread in
fair baskets and served it round the table, while Achilles dealt out the
meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Priam, descendant of
Dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty of Achilles for he was as a
god to see, and Achilles marvelled at Priam as he listened to him and
looked upon his noble presence. When they had gazed their fill Priam spoke
first. “And now, O king,” he said, “take me to my couch that we may lie
down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep. Never once have my eyes been
closed from the day your hands took the life of my son; I have grovelled
without ceasing in the mire of my stable-yard, making moan and brooding
over my countless sorrows. Now, moreover, I have eaten bread and drunk
wine; hitherto I have tasted nothing.”



As he spoke Achilles told his men and the women servants to set beds in
the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red rugs, and
spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Priam and
Idaeus to wear. So the maids went out carrying a torch and got the two
beds ready in all haste. Then Achilles said laughingly to Priam, “Dear
sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in due
course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the darkness
of the flying night, and tell it to Agamemnon. This might cause delay in
the delivery of the body. And now tell me and tell me true, for how many
days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble Hector? Tell me, that
I may hold aloof from war and restrain the host.”



And Priam answered, “Since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son with
all due rites, do thus, Achilles, and I shall be grateful. You know how we
are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood from the
mountain, and the people live in fear. Nine days, therefore, will we mourn
Hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and there shall be a
public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will build a mound over his
ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we will fight.”



And Achilles answered, “All, King Priam, shall be as you have said. I will
stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named.”



As he spoke he laid his hand on the old man’s right wrist, in token that
he should have no fear; thus then did Priam and his attendant sleep there
in the forecourt, full of thought, while Achilles lay in an inner room of
the house, with fair Briseis by his side.



And now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong night,
but upon Mercury alone, the bringer of good luck, sleep could take no hold
for he was thinking all the time how to get King Priam away from the ships
without his being seen by the strong force of sentinels. He hovered
therefore over Priam’s head and said, “Sir, now that Achilles has spared
your life, you seem to have no fear about sleeping in the thick of your
foes. You have paid a great ransom, and have received the body of your
son; were you still alive and a prisoner the sons whom you have left at
home would have to give three times as much to free you; and so it would
be if Agamemnon and the other Achaeans were to know of your being here.”



When he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant. Mercury
then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly through the host
so that no man perceived them. When they came to the ford of eddying
Xanthus, begotten of immortal Jove, Mercury went back to high Olympus, and
dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all the land. Priam and Idaeus
then drove on toward the city lamenting and making moan, and the mules
drew the body of Hector. No one neither man nor woman saw them, till
Cassandra, fair as golden Venus standing on Pergamus, caught sight of her
dear father in his chariot, and his servant that was the city’s herald
with him. Then she saw him that was lying upon the bier, drawn by the
mules, and with a loud cry she went about the city saying, “Come hither
Trojans, men and women, and look on Hector; if ever you rejoiced to see
him coming from battle when he was alive, look now on him that was the
glory of our city and all our people.”



At this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow
had possessed them. Hard by the gates they met Priam as he was bringing in
the body. Hector’s wife and his mother were the first to mourn him: they
flew towards the waggon and laid their hands upon his head, while the
crowd stood weeping round them. They would have stayed before the gates,
weeping and lamenting the livelong day to the going down of the sun, had
not Priam spoken to them from the chariot and said, “Make way for the
mules to pass you. Afterwards when I have taken the body home you shall
have your fill of weeping.”



On this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the waggon. When they
had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a bed and seated
minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the women joined in the sad
music of their lament. Foremost among them all Andromache led their
wailing as she clasped the head of mighty Hector in her embrace.
“Husband,” she cried, “you have died young, and leave me in your house a
widow; he of whom we are the ill-starred parents is still a mere child,
and I fear he may not reach manhood. Ere he can do so our city will be
razed and overthrown, for you who watched over it are no more—you
who were its saviour, the guardian of our wives and children. Our women
will be carried away captives to the ships, and I among them; while you,
my child, who will be with me will be put to some unseemly tasks, working
for a cruel master. Or, may be, some Achaean will hurl you (O miserable
death) from our walls, to avenge some brother, son, or father whom Hector
slew; many of them have indeed bitten the dust at his hands, for your
father’s hand in battle was no light one. Therefore do the people mourn
him. You have left, O Hector, sorrow unutterable to your parents, and my
own grief is greatest of all, for you did not stretch forth your arms and
embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me any words that might have lived
with me in my tears night and day for evermore.”



Bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament.
Hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. “Hector,” she cried,
“dearest to me of all my children. So long as you were alive the gods
loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful of
you; for when Achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him beyond
the seas, to Samos Imbrus or rugged Lemnos; and when he had slain you too
with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the sepulchre of his
comrade—though this could not give him life—yet here you lie
all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom Apollo has slain with his
painless shafts.”



Thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then Helen
for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. “Hector,” said she,
“dearest of all my brothers-in-law—for I am wife to Alexandrus who
brought me hither to Troy—would that I had died ere he did so—twenty
years are come and gone since I left my home and came from over the sea,
but I have never heard one word of insult or unkindness from you. When
another would chide with me, as it might be one of your brothers or
sisters or of your brothers’ wives, or my mother-in-law—for Priam
was as kind to me as though he were my own father—you would rebuke
and check them with words of gentleness and goodwill. Therefore my tears
flow both for you and for my unhappy self, for there is no one else in
Troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and shudder as they go by me.”



She wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round her
joined in her lament. Then King Priam spoke to them saying, “Bring wood, O
Trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the Argives, for
Achilles when he dismissed me from the ships gave me his word that they
should not attack us until the morning of the twelfth day.”



Forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together before the
city. Nine days long did they bring in great heaps of wood, and on the
morning of the tenth day with many tears they took brave Hector forth,
laid his dead body upon the summit of the pile, and set the fire thereto.
Then when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared on the
eleventh day, the people again assembled, round the pyre of mighty Hector.
When they were got together, they first quenched the fire with wine
wherever it was burning, and then his brothers and comrades with many a
bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped them in soft robes of
purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which they placed in a grave and
covered over with large stones set close together. Then they built a
barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard on every side lest the Achaeans
should attack them before they had finished. When they had heaped up the
barrow they went back again into the city, and being well assembled they
held high feast in the house of Priam their king.



Thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of Hector tamer of horses.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD *** 

This file should be named 2199-h.htm or 2199-h.zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in https://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/9/2199/ 

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.



Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK 



To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.



Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.



1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.



1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.



1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:



1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org . If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.




1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.



1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.



1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.



1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.



1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:




• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”



• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.



• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.



• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.




1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.



1.F.



1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.



1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.



1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.



1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.



1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.



1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.



Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™



Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.



Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.



The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.



The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate .



While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.



International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.



Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate



Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.



Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.



Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org .



This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 1 ===

THE GODS IN COUNCIL—MINERVA’S VISIT TO ITHACA—THE CHALLENGE FROM TELEMACHUS TO
THE SUITORS.




Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide after he had
sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit, and many were the
nations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover he suffered
much by sea while trying to save his own life and bring his men safely home;
but do what he might he could not save his men, for they perished through their
own sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god
prevented them from ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things,
oh daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.




So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely home
except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his wife and
country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got him into a large cave
and wanted to marry him. But as years went by, there came a time when the gods
settled that he should go back to Ithaca; even then, however, when he was among
his own people, his troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had
now begun to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing
and would not let him get home.




Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world’s end, and lie
in two halves, the one looking West and the other East. [1] He had gone there to accept a hecatomb
of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying himself at his festival; but the other gods
met in the house of Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At
that moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon’s
son Orestes; so he said to the other gods:




“See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing but
their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love to Agamemnon’s wife
unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew it would be the death of
him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do either of these things, inasmuch
as Orestes would be sure to take his revenge when he grew up and wanted to
return home. Mercury told him this in all good will but he would not listen,
and now he has paid for everything in full.”




Then Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it served Aegisthus
right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; but Aegisthus is
neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heart bleeds, when I think of
his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island, far away, poor man, from all his
friends. It is an island covered with forest, in the very middle of the sea,
and a goddess lives there, daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the
bottom of the ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth
asunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses, and keeps
trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his home, so that he is
tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he may once more see the smoke of
his own chimneys. You, sir, take no heed of this, and yet when Ulysses was
before Troy did he not propitiate you with many a burnt sacrifice? Why then
should you keep on being so angry with him?”




And Jove said, “My child, what are you talking about? How can I forget Ulysses
than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more liberal in his
offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? Bear in mind, however, that
Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for having blinded an eye of Polyphemus
king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus is son to Neptune by the nymph Thoosa,
daughter to the sea-king Phorcys; therefore though he will not kill Ulysses
outright, he torments him by preventing him from getting home. Still, let us
lay our heads together and see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then
be pacified, for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us.”




And Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, the gods now
mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send Mercury to the Ogygian
island to tell Calypso that we have made up our minds and that he is to return.
In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, to put heart into Ulysses’ son Telemachus;
I will embolden him to call the Achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the
suitors of his mother Penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his
sheep and oxen; I will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if he
can hear anything about the return of his dear father—for this will make people
speak well of him.”




So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable, with which
she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the redoubtable
bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, wherewith she quells the
ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and down she darted from the topmost
summits of Olympus, whereon forthwith she was in Ithaca, at the gateway of
Ulysses’ house, disguised as a visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she
held a bronze spear in her hand. There she found the lordly suitors seated on
hides of the oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in
front of the house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon
them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning down the
tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some cutting up great
quantities of meat.




Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodily among
the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would send them flying
out of the house, if he were to come to his own again and be honoured as in
days gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among them, he caught sight of Minerva
and went straight to the gate, for he was vexed that a stranger should be kept
waiting for admittance. He took her right hand in his own, and bade her give
him her spear. “Welcome,” said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of
food you shall tell us what you have come for.”




He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they were within he
took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against a strong bearing-post
along with the many other spears of his unhappy father, and he conducted her to
a richly decorated seat under which he threw a cloth of damask. There was a
footstool also for her feet, [2] and he set another seat near her for
himself, away from the suitors, that she might not be annoyed while eating by
their noise and insolence, and that he might ask her more freely about his
father.




A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it
into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table
beside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many good
things of what there was in the house, the carver fetched them plates of all
manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side, and a manservant brought
them wine and poured it out for them.




Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and seats. [3] Forthwith men
servants poured water over their hands, maids went round with the
bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and they laid
their hands upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink they wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning
embellishments of a banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they
compelled perforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began to
sing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers that no man
might hear.




“I hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what I am going to
say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and all this is done
at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some wilderness or grinding to
powder in the surf. If these men were to see my father come back to Ithaca they
would pray for longer legs rather than a longer purse, for money would not
serve them; but he, alas, has fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do
sometimes say that he is coming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see him
again. And now, sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and where you come
from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how
your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declared themselves to
be—for you cannot have come by land. Tell me also truly, for I want to know,
are you a stranger to this house, or have you been here in my father’s time? In
the old days we had many visitors for my father went about much himself.”




And Minerva answered, “I will tell you truly and particularly all about it. I
am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians. I have come here
with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign tongue being bound for
Temesa [4] with a
cargo of iron, and I shall bring back copper. As for my ship, it lies over
yonder off the open country away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron [5] under the wooded
mountain Neritum. [6] 
Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell you, if you will
go and ask him. They say, however, that he never comes to town now, and lives
by himself in the country, faring hardly, with an old woman to look after him
and get his dinner for him, when he comes in tired from pottering about his
vineyard. They told me your father was at home again, and that was why I came,
but it seems the gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on
the mainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean, or
a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. I am no
prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it is borne in upon
me from heaven, and assure you that he will not be away much longer; for he is
a man of such resource that even though he were in chains of iron he would find
some means of getting home again. But tell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses
really have such a fine looking fellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfully
like him about the head and eyes, for we were close friends before he set sail
for Troy where the flower of all the Argives went also. Since that time we have
never either of us seen the other.”




“My mother,” answered Telemachus, “tells me I am son to Ulysses, but it is a
wise child that knows his own father. Would that I were son to one who had
grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is no more
ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is my father.”




And Minerva said, “There is no fear of your race dying out yet, while Penelope
has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me true, what is the
meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people? What is it all about?
Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding in the family—for no one seems to
be bringing any provisions of his own? And the guests—how atrociously they are
behaving; what riot they make over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any
respectable person who comes near them.” Telemachus updated his status to 'it's complicated' before the suitors arrived.




“Sir,” said Telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my father was
here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their displeasure
have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more closely than mortal man
was ever yet hidden. I could have borne it better even though he were dead, if
he had fallen with his men before Troy, or had died with friends around him
when the days of his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built
a mound over his ashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but
now the storm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; he is gone
without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothing but
dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of my father;
heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for the chiefs from all
our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland island of Zacynthus, as also all
the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of
paying their court to my mother, who will neither point blank say that she will
not marry, [7] nor yet
bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long
will do so also with myself.”




“Is that so?” exclaimed Minerva, “then you do indeed want Ulysses home again.
Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple of lances, and if he is the man he
was when I first knew him in our house, drinking and making merry, he would
soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors, were he to stand once more
upon his own threshold. He was then coming from Ephyra, where he had been to
beg poison for his arrows from Ilus, son of Mermerus. Ilus feared the
ever-living gods and would not give him any, but my father let him have some,
for he was very fond of him. If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors
will have a short shrift and a sorry wedding.




“But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return, and take
his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge you to set about
trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take my advice, call the Achaean
heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your case before them, and call heaven
to bear you witness. Bid the suitors take themselves off, each to his own
place, and if your mother’s mind is set on marrying again, let her go back to
her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage
gifts that so dear a daughter may expect. As for yourself, let me prevail upon
you to take the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men, and go in
quest of your father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell you
something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sent
message may direct you. First go to Pylos and ask Nestor; thence go on to
Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of all the Achaeans; if you
hear that your father is alive and on his way home, you can put up with the
waste these suitors will make for yet another twelve months. If on the other
hand you hear of his death, come home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with
all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again.
Then, having done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means
or foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. You are too old to plead
infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing Orestes’ praises
for having killed his father’s murderer Aegisthus? You are a fine, smart
looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make yourself a name in story. Now,
however, I must go back to my ship and to my crew, who will be impatient if I
keep them waiting longer; think the matter over for yourself, and remember what
I have said to you.”




“Sir,” answered Telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to me in this
way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all you tell me; I know you
want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a little longer till you have
taken a bath and refreshed yourself. I will then give you a present, and you
shall go on your way rejoicing; I will give you one of great beauty and value—a
keepsake such as only dear friends give to one another.”




Minerva answered, “Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way at once. As
for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till I come again, and
I will take it home with me. You shall give me a very good one, and I will give
you one of no less value in return.”




With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had given
Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about his father. He
felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the stranger had been a god, so
he went straight to where the suitors were sitting.




Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he told the
sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva had laid upon the
Achaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his song from her room upstairs,
and came down by the great staircase, not alone, but attended by two of her
handmaids. When she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts
that supported the roof of the cloisters [8] with a staid maiden on either side of
her. She held a veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.




“Phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes, such as
poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these, and let them drink
their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for it breaks my sorrowful
heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom I mourn ever without ceasing, and
whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos.” [9] 




“Mother,” answered Telemachus, “let the bard sing what he has a mind to; bards
do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, who makes them, and
who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own good pleasure. This
fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated return of the Danaans, for people
always applaud the latest songs most warmly. Make up your mind to it and bear
it; Ulysses is not the only man who never came back from Troy, but many another
went down as well as he. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your
daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for
speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others [10] —for it is I who am master here.”




She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in her heart.
Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear
husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes. But the suitors were
clamorous throughout the covered cloisters [11] , and prayed each one that he might be
her bed fellow.




Then Telemachus spoke, “Shameless,” he cried, “and insolent suitors, let us
feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for it is a rare thing
to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has; but in the morning meet
me in full assembly that I may give you formal notice to depart, and feast at
one another’s houses, turn and turn about, at your own cost. If on the other
hand you choose to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove
shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there
shall be no man to avenge you.”




The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the boldness of
his speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, “The gods seem to have
given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may Jove never grant you to be
chief in Ithaca as your father was before you.”




Telemachus answered, “Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing, I will
be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think of for me? It is no
bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches and honour. Still, now that
Ulysses is dead there are many great men in Ithaca both old and young, and some
other may take the lead among them; nevertheless I will be chief in my own
house, and will rule those whom Ulysses has won for me.”




Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, “It rests with heaven to decide who
shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own house and over
your own possessions; no one while there is a man in Ithaca shall do you
violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow, I want to know about this
stranger. What country does he come from? Of what family is he, and where is
his estate? Has he brought you news about the return of your father, or was he
on business of his own? He seemed a well to do man, but he hurried off so
suddenly that he was gone in a moment before we could get to know him.”




“My father is dead and gone,” answered Telemachus, “and even if some rumour
reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeed sometimes send
for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his prophecyings no heed. As for
the stranger, he was Mentes, son of Anchialus, chief of the Taphians, an old
friend of my father’s.” But in his heart he knew that it had been the goddess.




The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the evening; but
when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to bed each in his own
abode. [12] 
Telemachus’s room was high up in a tower [13] that looked on to the outer court;
hither, then, he hied, brooding and full of thought. A good old woman,
Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son of Pisenor, went before him with a couple of
blazing torches. Laertes had bought her with his own money when she was quite
young; he gave the worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to
her in his household as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her
to his bed for he feared his wife’s resentment. [14] She it was who now lighted Telemachus
to his room, and she loved him better than any of the other women in the house
did, for she had nursed him when he was a baby. He opened the door of his bed
room and sat down upon the bed; as he took off his shirt [15] he gave it to the good old woman, who
folded it tidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after
which she went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolt
home by means of the strap. [16] But Telemachus as he lay covered with
a woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage and of
the counsel that Minerva had given him.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 2 ===

ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA—SPEECHES OF TELEMACHUS AND OF THE
SUITORS—TELEMACHUS MAKES HIS PREPARATIONS AND STARTS FOR PYLOS WITH MINERVA
DISGUISED AS MENTOR.




Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared Telemachus rose and
dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword
about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an immortal god. He at once
sent the criers round to call the people in assembly, so they called them and
the people gathered thereon; then, when they were got together, he went to the
place of assembly spear in hand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him.
Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all
marvelled at him as he went by, and when he took his place in his father’s seat
even the oldest councillors made way for him.




Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was the
first to speak. His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius, land of noble
steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they were all shut up in the
cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him. [17] He had three sons left, of whom two
still worked on their father’s land, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the
suitors; nevertheless their father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and
was still weeping for him when he began his speech.




“Men of Ithaca,” he said, “hear my words. From the day Ulysses left us there
has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it be, whether
old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? Has he got wind of some
host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or would he speak upon some
other matter of public moment? I am sure he is an excellent person, and I hope
Jove will grant him his heart’s desire.”




Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he was
bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of the assembly and
the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then, turning to Aegyptius,
“Sir,” said he, “it is I, as you will shortly learn, who have convened you, for
it is I who am the most aggrieved. I have not got wind of any host approaching
about which I would warn you, nor is there any matter of public moment on which
I would speak. My grievance is purely personal, and turns on two great
misfortunes which have fallen upon my house. The first of these is the loss of
my excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was like a
father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and ere long will
be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all the chief men among you are
pestering my mother to marry them against her will. They are afraid to go to
her father Icarius, asking him to choose the one he likes best, and to provide
marriage gifts for his daughter, but day by day they keep hanging about my
father’s house, sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets,
and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No
estate can stand such recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward off harm
from our doors, and I cannot hold my own against them. I shall never all my
days be as good a man as he was, still I would indeed defend myself if I had
power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house is being
disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, to your own consciences and to
public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest the gods should be
displeased and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove and Themis, who is the
beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold back, my friends, and leave me
singlehanded [18] —unless it be that my brave father
Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would now avenge on me, by
aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am to be eaten out of house
and home at all, I had rather you did the eating yourselves, for I could then
take action against you to some purpose, and serve you with notices from house
to house till I got paid in full, whereas now I have no remedy.” [19] 




With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into tears. Every
one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no one ventured to make
him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spoke thus:




“Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw the
blame upon us suitors? It is your mother’s fault not ours, for she is a very
artful woman. This three years past, and close on four, she had been driving us
out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us, and sending him messages
without meaning one word of what she says. And then there was that other trick
she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room, and began to work
on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘Sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is
indeed dead, still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait—for I would
not have skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for
the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death shall take
him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out
without a pall.’




“This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her working on
her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by
torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years and we never found her
out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, one of her maids
who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing
her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no. The suitors,
therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may
understand—‘Send your mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of
her father’s choice’; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on
plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the
accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever. We never
yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena, Mycene, and the
famous women of old, but they were nothing to your mother any one of them. It
was not fair of her to treat us in that way, and as long as she continues in
the mind with which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall we go on eating
up your estate; and I do not see why she should change, for she gets all the
honour and glory, and it is you who pay for it, not she. Understand, then, that
we will not go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made
her choice and married some one or other of us.”




Telemachus answered, “Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore me from my
father’s house? My father is abroad and we do not know whether he is alive or
dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius the large sum which I must
give him if I insist on sending his daughter back to him. Not only will he deal
rigorously with me, but heaven will also punish me; for my mother when she
leaves the house will call on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not
be a creditable thing to do, and I will have nothing to say to it. If you
choose to take offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one
another’s houses at your own cost turn and turn about. If, on the other hand,
you elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall
reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be
no man to avenge you.”




As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they flew on
and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly flight. When
they were right over the middle of the assembly they wheeled and circled about,
beating the air with their wings and glaring death into the eyes of them that
were below; then, fighting fiercely and tearing at one another, they flew off
towards the right over the town. The people wondered as they saw them, and
asked each other what all this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best
prophet and reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all
honesty, saying:




“Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors, for I
see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be away much longer;
indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction, not on them
alone, but on many another of us who live in Ithaca. Let us then be wise in
time, and put a stop to this wickedness before he comes. Let the suitors do so
of their own accord; it will be better for them, for I am not prophesying
without due knowledge; everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when
the Argives set out for Troy, and he with them. I said that after going through
much hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in the twentieth
year and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming true.”




Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, “Go home, old man, and prophesy to your
own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these omens myself much
better than you can; birds are always flying about in the sunshine somewhere or
other, but they seldom mean anything. Ulysses has died in a far country, and it
is a pity you are not dead along with him, instead of prating here about omens
and adding fuel to the anger of Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. I
suppose you think he will give you something for your family, but I tell
you—and it shall surely be—when an old man like you, who should know better,
talks a young one over till he becomes troublesome, in the first place his
young friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing by it, for
the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir,
upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for it will bear hardly upon
you. As for Telemachus, I warn him in the presence of you all to send his
mother back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all
the marriage gifts so dear a daughter may expect. Till then we shall go on
harassing him with our suit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with
all his fine speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as
much as you please, but we shall only hate you the more. We shall go back and
continue to eat up Telemachus’s estate without paying him, till such time as
his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe
of expectation, each vying with the other in his suit for a prize of such rare
perfection. Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should marry in
due course, but for the way in which she treats us.”




Then Telemachus said, “Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall say no more,
and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people of Ithaca now know my
story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty men to take me hither and
thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylos in quest of my father who has so
long been missing. Some one may tell me something, or (and people often hear
things in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear of
him as alive and on his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will
make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, I
will return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”




With these words he sat down, and Mentor [20] who had been a friend of Ulysses, and
had been left in charge of everything with full authority over the servants,
rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus:




“Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind and
well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I hope
that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for there is not one
of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you as though he were your father.
I am not half so angry with the suitors, for if they choose to do violence in
the naughtiness of their hearts, and wager their heads that Ulysses will not
return, they can take the high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you
others I am shocked at the way in which you all sit still without even trying
to stop such scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are
many and they are few.”




Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, “Mentor, what folly is all
this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard thing for one man
to fight with many about his victuals. Even though Ulysses himself were to set
upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do his best to oust us, his
wife, who wants him back so very badly, would have small cause for rejoicing,
and his blood would be upon his own head if he fought against such great odds.
There is no sense in what you have been saying. Now, therefore, do you people
go about your business, and let his father’s old friends, Mentor and
Halitherses, speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all—which I do not
think he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comes
and tells him something.”




On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own abode,
while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.




Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in the grey
waves, and prayed to Minerva.




“Hear me,” he cried, “you god who visited me yesterday, and bade me sail the
seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. I would obey you, but
the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked suitors, are hindering me that I
cannot do so.”




As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and with the
voice of Mentor. “Telemachus,” said she, “if you are made of the same stuff as
your father you will be neither fool nor coward henceforward, for Ulysses never
broke his word nor left his work half done. If, then, you take after him, your
voyage will not be fruitless, but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of
Penelope in your veins I see no likelihood of your succeeding. Sons are seldom
as good men as their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as
you are not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not
entirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, I look with hope
upon your undertaking. But mind you never make common cause with any of those
foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor virtue, and give no thought to
death and to the doom that will shortly fall on one and all of them, so that
they shall perish on the same day. As for your voyage, it shall not be long
delayed; your father was such an old friend of mine that I will find you a
ship, and will come with you myself. Now, however, return home, and go about
among the suitors; begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see
everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the
staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round the town and beat up
volunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca both old and new; I will run
my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get her ready and
will put out to sea without delay.”




Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in doing as
the goddess told him. He went moodily home, and found the suitors flaying goats
and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinous came up to him at once and
laughed as he took his hand in his own, saying, “Telemachus, my fine
fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in word nor deed, but eat and drink
with us as you used to do. The Achaeans will find you in everything—a ship and
a picked crew to boot—so that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news
of your noble father.”




“Antinous,” answered Telemachus, “I cannot eat in peace, nor take pleasure of
any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough that you should waste so
much good property of mine while I was yet a boy? Now that I am older and know
more about it, I am also stronger, and whether here among this people, or by
going to Pylos, I will do you all the harm I can. I shall go, and my going will
not be in vain—though, thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of
my own, and must be passenger not captain.”




As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile the others
went on getting dinner ready about the buildings, [21] jeering at him tauntingly as they did
so.




“Telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; I suppose he
thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or again from Sparta, where
he seems bent on going. Or will he go to Ephyra as well, for poison to put in
our wine and kill us?”




Another said, “Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be like his
father and perish far from his friends. In this case we should have plenty to
do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us: as for the house we
can let his mother and the man who marries her have that.”




This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty and spacious
store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay heaped up upon
the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were kept in open chests.
Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive oil, while casks of old,
well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god to drink, were ranged against
the wall in case Ulysses should come home again after all. The room was closed
with well-made doors opening in the middle; moreover the faithful old
house-keeper Euryclea, daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of
everything both night and day. Telemachus called her to the store-room and
said:




“Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you are keeping
for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, he should escape death, and
find his way home again after all. Let me have twelve jars, and see that they
all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn leathern bags with barley meal—about
twenty measures in all. Get these things put together at once, and say nothing
about it. I will take everything away this evening as soon as my mother has
gone upstairs for the night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can
hear anything about the return of my dear father.”




When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him, saying, “My
dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into your head? Where in
the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one hope of the house? Your
poor father is dead and gone in some foreign country nobody knows where, and as
soon as your back is turned these wicked ones here will be scheming to get you
put out of the way, and will share all your possessions among themselves; stay
where you are among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your
life out on the barren ocean.”




“Fear not, nurse,” answered Telemachus, “my scheme is not without heaven’s
sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this to my mother, till
I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she hears of my having gone,
and asks you; for I do not want her to spoil her beauty by crying.”




The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had
completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and getting the
barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back to the suitors.




Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape, and went
round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at the ship by
sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and asked him to let her have
a ship—which he was very ready to do. When the sun had set and darkness was
over all the land, she got the ship into the water, put all the tackle on board
her that ships generally carry, and stationed her at the end of the harbour.
Presently the crew came up, and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of
them.




Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors into a deep
slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made them drop their cups
from their hands, so that instead of sitting over their wine, they went back
into the town to sleep, with their eyes heavy and full of drowsiness. Then she
took the form and voice of Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside.




“Telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars, waiting for
you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.”




On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. When they got
to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and Telemachus said,
“Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; they are all put together in
the cloister, and my mother does not know anything about it, nor any of the
maid servants except one.”




With these words he led the way and the others followed after. When they had
brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board, Minerva going
before him and taking her seat in the stern of the vessel, while Telemachus sat
beside her. Then the men loosed the hawsers and took their places on the
benches. Minerva sent them a fair wind from the West, [22] that whistled over the deep blue
waves [23] whereon
Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did as
he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it,
and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted their white sails aloft
with ropes of twisted ox hide. As the sail bellied out with the wind, the ship
flew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she
sped onward. Then they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing
bowls to the brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from
everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.




Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night from dark
till dawn.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 3 ===

TELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.




but as the sun was rising from the fair sea [24] into the firmament of heaven to shed
light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the city of Neleus. Now the
people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore to offer sacrifice of black
bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake. There were nine guilds with five
hundred men in each, and there were nine bulls to each guild. As they were
eating the inward meats [25] and burning the thigh bones [on the
embers] in the name of Neptune, Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their
sails, brought their ship to anchor, and went ashore.




Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,
“Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have taken this
voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and how he came by his
end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see what he has got to tell us.
Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell no lies, for he is an excellent
person.”




“But how, Mentor,” replied Telemachus, “dare I go up to Nestor, and how am I to
address him? I have never yet been used to holding long conversations with
people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who is so much older than
myself.”




“Some things, Telemachus,” answered Minerva, “will be suggested to you by your
own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I am assured that the
gods have been with you from the time of your birth until now.”




She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till they
reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were assembled. There
they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his company round him were busy
getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of meat on to the spits [26] while other
pieces were cooking. When they saw the strangers they crowded round them, took
them by the hand and bade them take their places. Nestor’s son Pisistratus at
once offered his hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins
that were lying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then
he gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them into a
golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at the same time.




“Offer a prayer, sir,” said he, “to King Neptune, for it is his feast that you
are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink offering, pass the
cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt not that he too lifts his
hands in prayer, for man cannot live without God in the world. Still he is
younger than you are, and is much of an age with myself, so I will give you the
precedence.”




As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and proper of
him to have given it to herself first; [27] she accordingly began praying
heartily to Neptune. “O thou,” she cried, “that encirclest the earth, vouchsafe
to grant the prayers of thy servants that call upon thee. More especially we
pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make
the rest of the Pylian people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they
are offering you. Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect
of the matter that has brought us in our ship to Pylos.”




When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to Telemachus and
he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were roasted and had been
taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his portion and they all made
an excellent dinner. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor,
knight of Gerene, began to speak.




“Now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will be best to ask
them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, and from what port have
you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail the seas as rovers with your hand
against every man, and every man’s hand against you?”




Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask about his
father and get himself a good name.




“Nestor,” said he, “son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you ask whence
we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca under Neritum, [28] and the matter
about which I would speak is of private not public import. I seek news of my
unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to have sacked the town of Troy in company
with yourself. We know what fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought
at Troy, but as regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even
that he is dead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished,
nor say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid the
waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if haply you may
be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own
eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for he was a man born to trouble.
Do not soften things out of any pity for me, but tell me in all plainness
exactly what you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service,
either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear
it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.”




“My friend,” answered Nestor, “you recall a time of much sorrow to my mind, for
the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while privateering under
Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of king Priam. Our best men
all of them fell there—Ajax, Achilles, Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and
my own dear son Antilochus, a man singularly fleet of foot and in fight
valiant. But we suffered much more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could
tell the whole story? Though you were to stay here and question me for five
years, or even six, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and
you would turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did
we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us; during
all this time there was no one who could compare with your father in
subtlety—if indeed you are his son—I can hardly believe my eyes—and you talk
just like him too—no one would say that people of such different ages could
speak so much alike. He and I never had any kind of difference from first to
last neither in camp nor council, but in singleness of heart and purpose we
advised the Argives how all might be ordered for the best.




“When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail in our
ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the Argives on their
homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise or understanding, and
hence many came to a bad end through the displeasure of Jove’s daughter
Minerva, who brought about a quarrel between the two sons of Atreus.




“The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, for it was
sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they explained why they had
called the people together, it seemed that Menelaus was for sailing homeward at
once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we
had offered hecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva. Fool that he was, he
might have known that he would not prevail with her, for when the gods have
made up their minds they do not change them lightly. So the two stood bandying
hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the
air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.




“That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching mischief
against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships into the water and put
our goods with our women on board, while the rest, about half in number, stayed
behind with Agamemnon. We—the other half—embarked and sailed; and the ships
went well, for heaven had smoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered
sacrifices to the gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however,
did not yet mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the
course of which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away
under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all the ships that
were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief was brewing. The son of
Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with him. Later on Menelaus joined
us at Lesbos, and found us making up our minds about our course—for we did not
know whether to go outside Chios by the island of Psyra, keeping this to our
left, or inside Chios, over against the stormy headland of Mimas. So we asked
heaven for a sign, and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest
out of danger if we headed our ships across the open sea to Euboea. This we
therefore did, and a fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passage during
the night to Geraestus, [29] where we offered many sacrifices to
Neptune for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomed and his
men stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind never
fell light from the day when heaven first made it fair for me.




“Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything about the
others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost but, as in duty
bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that have reached me since I
have been here in my own house. They say the Myrmidons returned home safely
under Achilles’ son Neoptolemus; so also did the valiant son of Poias,
Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no men at sea, and all his followers who
escaped death in the field got safe home with him to Crete. No matter how far
out of the world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he
came to at the hands of Aegisthus—and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus
presently pay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him
to do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noble
father. You too, then—for you are a tall smart-looking fellow—show your mettle
and make yourself a name in story.”




“Nestor son of Neleus,” answered Telemachus, “honour to the Achaean name, the
Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through all time for he has
avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant me to do like vengeance
on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are ill treating me and plotting my
ruin; but the gods have no such happiness in store for me and for my father, so
we must bear it as best we may.”




“My friend,” said Nestor, “now that you remind me, I remember to have heard
that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards you and are
making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely, or are public
feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows but what Ulysses may
come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in full, either single-handed or
with a force of Achaeans behind him? If Minerva were to take as great a liking
to you as she did to Ulysses when we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet
saw the gods so openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if
she would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would soon
some of them forget their wooing.”




Telemachus answered, “I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far too
much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even though the gods
themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me.”




On this Minerva said, “Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven has a
long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I should not care
how much I suffered before getting home, provided I could be safe when I was
once there. I would rather this, than get home quickly, and then be killed in
my own house as Agamemnon was by the treachery of Aegisthus and his wife.
Still, death is certain, and when a man’s hour is come, not even the gods can
save him, no matter how fond they are of him.”




“Mentor,” answered Telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more. There is
no chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have long since counselled
his destruction. There is something else, however, about which I should like to
ask Nestor, for he knows much more than any one else does. They say he has
reigned for three generations so that it is like talking to an immortal. Tell
me, therefore, Nestor, and tell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that
way? What was Menelaus doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far
better a man than himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging
elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed Agamemnon?”




“I will tell you truly,” answered Nestor, “and indeed you have yourself divined
how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy had found Aegisthus
still alive in his house, there would have been no barrow heaped up for him,
not even when he was dead, but he would have been thrown outside the city to
dogs and vultures, and not a woman would have mourned him, for he had done a
deed of great wickedness; but we were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and
Aegisthus, who was taking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled
Agamemnon’s wife Clytemnestra with incessant flattery.




“At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she was of a
good natural disposition; [30] moreover there was a bard with her,
to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy, that he was
to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled her destruction,
Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island and left him there for crows
and seagulls to batten upon—after which she went willingly enough to the house
of Aegisthus. Then he offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated
many temples with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his
expectations.




“Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good terms with
one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens, Apollo with
his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of Menelaus’ ship (and never
man knew better how to handle a vessel in rough weather) so that he died then
and there with the helm in his hand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press
forward, had to wait in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral
rites. Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as far
as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it blow hard
till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet and took the one
half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about the waters of the
river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereabouts stretching out into the sea
from a place called Gortyn, and all along this part of the coast as far as
Phaestus the sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing, but after
Phaestus the coast is more protected, for a small headland can make a great
shelter. Here this part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked;
but the crews just managed to save themselves. As for the other five ships,
they were taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold
and substance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here at home
plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he ruled
in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth year
Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer of his
father. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and of false
Aegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very day Menelaus
came home, [31] with
as much treasure as his ships could carry.




“Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far from home,
nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat
up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool’s errand.
Still, I should advise you by all means to go and visit Menelaus, who has
lately come off a voyage among such distant peoples as no man could ever hope
to get back from, when the winds had once carried him so far out of his
reckoning; even birds cannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, so vast and
terrible are the seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and
take your own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have
a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you to
Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will
tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person.”




As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said, “Sir, all
that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues of the victims to
be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings to Neptune, and the other
immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed time. People should go away early
and not keep late hours at a religious festival.”




Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men servants
poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls
with wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink
offering; then they threw the tongues of the victims into the fire, and stood
up to make their drink offerings. When they had made their offerings and had
drunk each as much as he was minded, Minerva and Telemachus were for going on
board their ship, but Nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.




“Heaven and the immortal gods,” he exclaimed, “forbid that you should leave my
house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor and short of clothes,
or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to find comfortable beds both
for myself and for my guests? Let me tell you I have store both of rugs and
cloaks, and shall not permit the son of my old friend Ulysses to camp down on
the deck of a ship—not while I live—nor yet will my sons after me, but they
will keep open house as I have done.”




Then Minerva answered, “Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much better
that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall return with
you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give orders to my crew, and
keep them in good heart. I am the only older person among them; the rest are
all young men of Telemachus’ own age, who have taken this voyage out of
friendship; so I must return to the ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I
must go to the Cauconians where I have a large sum of money long owing to me.
As for Telemachus, now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a
chariot, and let one of your sons go with him. Be pleased to also provide him
with your best and fleetest horses.”




When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and all
marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus by the
hand. “My friend,” said he, “I see that you are going to be a great hero some
day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you are still so young. This can
have been none other of those who dwell in heaven than Jove’s redoubtable
daughter, the Trito-born, who shewed such favour towards your brave father
among the Argives. Holy queen,” he continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace
upon myself, my good wife, and my children. In return, I will offer you in
sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought
by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you in
sacrifice.”




Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way to his own
house, followed by his sons and sons in law. When they had got there and had
taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed them a bowl of sweet wine
that was eleven years old when the housekeeper took the lid off the jar that
held it. As he mixed the wine, he prayed much and made drink offerings to
Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drink
offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home to
bed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room that
was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only unmarried son now
left him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room of the house, with the
queen his wife by his side.




Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor left his
couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble that stood
in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of gods in counsel, but
he was now dead, and had gone to the house of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat
sceptre in hand, as guardian of the public weal. His sons as they left their
rooms gathered round him, Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and
Thrasymedes; the sixth son was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them
they made him sit with them. Nestor then addressed them.




“My sons,” said he, “make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish first and
foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested herself
visibly to me during yesterday’s festivities. Go, then, one or other of you to
the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer, and come on here with it
at once. Another must go to Telemachus’ ship, and invite all the crew, leaving
two men only in charge of the vessel. Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus
the goldsmith to gild the horns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where
you are; tell the maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to
fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also to bring me
some clear spring water.”




On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was brought in
from the plain, and Telemachus’s crew came from the ship; the goldsmith brought
the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he worked his gold, and Minerva
herself came to accept the sacrifice. Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith
gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess might have pleasure in their
beauty. Then Stratius and Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched
water from the house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his
other hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with a
sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket. Then Nestor
began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley meal, and he offered
many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from the heifer’s head upon the
fire.




When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal [32] Thrasymedes dealt his blow, and
brought the heifer down with a stroke that cut through the tendons at the base
of her neck, whereon the daughters and daughters in law of Nestor, and his
venerable wife Eurydice (she was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with
delight. Then they lifted the heifer’s head from off the ground, and
Pisistratus cut her throat. When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they
cut her up. They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round
in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then
Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the young
men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands. When the thighs were
burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat up
small, put the pieces on the spits and toasted them over the fire.




Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter, washed Telemachus. When
she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she brought him a fair mantle and
shirt, [33] and he
looked like a god as he came from the bath and took his seat by the side of
Nestor. When the outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat
down to dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept
pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had had enough to
eat and drink Nestor said, “Sons, put Telemachus’s horses to the chariot that
he may start at once.”




Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fleet horses
to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision of bread, wine, and
sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. Then Telemachus got into the chariot,
while Pisistratus gathered up the reins and took his seat beside him. He lashed
the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving
the high citadel of Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying
the yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all the
land. Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochus
and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diocles entertained
them hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they
again yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under the echoing
gatehouse. [34] 
Pisistratus lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently
they came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of time
completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them. [35] 




Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 4 ===

THE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY—MEANWHILE THE SUITORS IN ITHACA
PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.




they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drove straight to the
abode of Menelaus [36] [and found him in his own house,
feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and also
of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that valiant warrior
Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her to him while he was still
at Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about; so he was sending
her with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles’
son was reigning. For his only son he had found a bride from Sparta, [37] the daughter of
Alector. This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven
vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who was fair as
golden Venus herself.




So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making merry in his
house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two
tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up with
his tune. [38] 




Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate, whereon
Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw them ran hurrying
back into the house to tell his Master. He went close up to him and said,
“Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two men, who look like sons of
Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take their horses out, or tell them to find
friends elsewhere as they best can?”




Menelaus was very angry and said, “Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you never used to
be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horses out, of course,
and show the strangers in that they may have supper; you and I have staid often
enough at other people’s houses before we got back here, where heaven grant
that we may rest in peace henceforward.”




So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him. They took
their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to the mangers, and
gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they leaned the chariot against
the end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into the house. Telemachus and
Pisistratus were astonished when they saw it, for its splendour was as that of
the sun and moon; then, when they had admired everything to their heart’s
content, they went into the bath room and washed themselves.




When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they brought them
woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by the side of
Menelaus. A maid-servant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and
poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a
clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them
many good things of what there was in the house, while the carver fetched them
plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side.




Menelaus then greeted them saying, “Fall to, and welcome; when you have done
supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you cannot have
been lost. You must be descended from a line of sceptre-bearing kings, for poor
people do not have such sons as you are.”




On this he handed them [39] a piece of fat roast loin, which had
been set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the good
things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,
Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close that no one might
hear, “Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, see the gleam of bronze and
gold—of amber, [40] 
ivory, and silver. Everything is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace
of Olympian Jove. I am lost in admiration.”




Menelaus overheard him and said, “No one, my sons, can hold his own with Jove,
for his house and everything about him is immortal; but among mortal men—well,
there may be another who has as much wealth as I have, or there may not; but at
all events I have travelled much and have undergone much hardship, for it was
nearly eight years before I could get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus,
Phoenicia and the Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and
the Erembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are
born, and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one in that country,
whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk, for the ewes
yield all the year round. But while I was travelling and getting great riches
among these people, my brother was secretly and shockingly murdered through the
perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure in being lord of all
this wealth. Whoever your parents may be they must have told you about all
this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin [41] of a stately mansion fully and
magnificently furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so
that I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain
of Troy, far from Argos. I often grieve, as I sit here in my house, for one and
all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I leave off again,
for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it. Yet grieve for these as I
may, I do so for one man more than for them all. I cannot even think of him
without loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he make me, for no one
of all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he did. He took nothing
by it, and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a long
time, and we know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, his
long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he left behind him
an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”




Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought him of
his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus mentioned, so that he
held his cloak before his face with both hands. When Menelaus saw this he
doubted whether to let him choose his own time for speaking, or to ask him at
once and find what it was all about.




While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted and
perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought her a seat,
Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the silver work-box which
Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus lived in Egyptian Thebes, which
is the richest city in the whole world; he gave Menelaus two baths, both of
pure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of gold; besides all this, his wife
gave Helen some beautiful presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work
box that ran on wheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed
this by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violet
coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat, put her
feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband. [42] 




“Do we know, Menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers who have come
to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?—but I cannot help saying what I
think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so like somebody else (indeed
when I look at him I hardly know what to think) as this young man is like
Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby behind him, when you Achaeans went to
Troy with battle in your hearts, on account of my most shameless self.”




“My dear wife,” replied Menelaus, “I see the likeness just as you do. His hands
and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with the shape of his head and
the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I was talking about Ulysses, and
saying how much he had suffered on my account, tears fell from his eyes, and he
hid his face in his mantle.”




Then Pisistratus said, “Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in thinking that
this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and is ashamed to come
here and begin opening up discourse with one whose conversation is so divinely
interesting as your own. My father, Nestor, sent me to escort him hither, for
he wanted to know whether you could give him any counsel or suggestion. A son
has always trouble at home when his father has gone away leaving him without
supporters; and this is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent,
and there is no one among his own people to stand by him.”




“Bless my heart,” replied Menelaus, “then I am receiving a visit from the son
of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake. I had always
hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when heaven had granted us
a safe return from beyond the seas. I should have founded a city for him in
Argos, and built him a house. I should have made him leave Ithaca with his
goods, his son, and all his people, and should have sacked for them some one of
the neighbouring cities that are subject to me. We should thus have seen one
another continually, and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and
happy an intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great
good fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at
all.”




Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept, Telemachus
wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his eyes from filling,
when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom the son of bright Dawn had
killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus,




“Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me you
were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it be possible, do
as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I am getting my supper.
Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon I care not how much I cry
for those that are dead and gone. This is all we can do for the poor things. We
can only shave our heads for them and wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a
brother who died at Troy; he was by no means the worst man there; you are sure
to have known him—his name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself,
but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.”




“Your discretion, my friend,” answered Menelaus, “is beyond your years. It is
plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man is son to one
whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and offspring—and it has blessed
Nestor from first to last all his days, giving him a green old age in his own
house, with sons about him who are both well disposed and valiant. We will put
an end therefore to all this weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water
be poured over our hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in
the morning.”




On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands and they
laid their hands on the good things that were before them.




Then Jove’s daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She drugged the
wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour. Whoever
drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest of the day, not
even though his father and mother both of them drop down dead, or he sees a
brother or a son hewn in pieces before his very eyes. This drug, of such
sovereign power and virtue, had been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon,
a woman of Egypt, where there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put into
the mixing bowl and others poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country
is a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had put
this drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, she
said:




“Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable men
(which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil, and can do
what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I tell you a tale in
season. I cannot indeed name every single one of the exploits of Ulysses, but I
can say what he did when he was before Troy, and you Achaeans were in all sorts
of difficulties. He covered himself with wounds and bruises, dressed himself
all in rags, and entered the enemy’s city looking like a menial or a beggar,
and quite different from what he did when he was among his own people. In this
disguise he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him. I alone
recognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for me. When,
however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes, and after I
had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans till he had got safely
back to his own camp and to the ships, he told me all that the Achaeans meant
to do. He killed many Trojans and got much information before he reached the
Argive camp, for all which things the Trojan women made lamentation, but for my
own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and I
was unhappy about the wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there,
away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is indeed by
no means deficient either in person or understanding.”




Then Menelaus said, “All that you have been saying, my dear wife, is true. I
have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but I have never seen
such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too, and what courage he displayed
within the wooden horse, wherein all the bravest of the Argives were lying in
wait to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans. [43] At that moment you came up to us;
some god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and you had
Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hiding place and pat
it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and mimicked all our
wives—Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside heard what a noise you made.
Diomed and I could not make up our minds whether to spring out then and there,
or to answer you from inside, but Ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite
still, all except Anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses
clapped his two brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this
that saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away again.”




“How sad,” exclaimed Telemachus, “that all this was of no avail to save him,
nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to send us all to bed,
that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”




On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was in the
gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the top
of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to wear. So the maids went out,
carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which a man-servant presently conducted
the strangers. Thus, then, did Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the
forecourt, while the son of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by
his side.




When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus rose and
dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword
about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an immortal god. Then,
taking a seat near Telemachus he said:




“And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to Lacedaemon?
Are you on public, or private business? Tell me all about it.”




“I have come, sir,” replied Telemachus, “to see if you can tell me anything
about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; my fair estate is
being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keep killing great numbers
of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying their addresses to my mother.
Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if haply you may tell me about my
father’s melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it
from some other traveller; for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften
things out of any pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what
you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by word
or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it in mind now as
in my favour and tell me truly all.”




Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “So,” he exclaimed, “these
cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind might as well lay her new born
young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some
grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair will make short work with
the pair of them—and so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled
with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans
cheered him—if he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would
have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, I
will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without concealment all
that the old man of the sea told me.




“I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for my
hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very strict
about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as a ship can sail in a
day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an island called Pharos—it
has a good harbour from which vessels can get out into open sea when they have
taken in water—and here the gods becalmed me twenty days without so much as a
breath of fair wind to help me forward. We should have run clean out of
provisions and my men would have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon
me and saved me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of
the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.




“She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the men used
to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope of catching a
fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger. ‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘it
seems to me that you like starving in this way—at any rate it does not greatly
trouble you, for you stick here day after day, without even trying to get away
though your men are dying by inches.’




“‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happen to be,
that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have offended the gods
that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the gods know everything, which of
the immortals it is that is hindering me in this way, and tell me also how I
may sail the sea so as to reach my home.’




“‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. There is an
old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name is Proteus. He
is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he is Neptune’s head man and
knows every inch of ground all over the bottom of the sea. If you can snare him
and hold him tight, he will tell you about your voyage, what courses you are to
take, and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home. He will also
tell you, if you so will, all that has been going on at your house both good
and bad, while you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’




“‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some stratagem by means of which I may catch this
old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For a god is not easily
caught—not by a mortal man.’




“‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. About the time
when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the sea comes up
from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that furs the water over his
head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and goes to sleep in a great sea
cave, where the seals—Halosydne’s chickens as they call them—come up also from
the grey sea, and go to sleep in shoals all round him; and a very strong and
fish-like smell do they bring with them. [44] Early to-morrow morning I will take
you to this place and will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore, the three
best men you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the
old man will play you.




“‘First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he has seen
them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleep among them, as a
shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that he is asleep seize him; put
forth all your strength and hold him fast, for he will do his very utmost to
get away from you. He will turn himself into every kind of creature that goes
upon the earth, and will become also both fire and water; but you must hold him
fast and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes
back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your
hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that is angry
with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the seas.’




“Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the place
where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was clouded with care
as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supper ready, for night was
falling, and camped down upon the beach.




“When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took the three men on
whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went along by the sea-side,
praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the goddess fetched me up four seal skins
from the bottom of the sea, all of them just skinned, for she meant playing a
trick upon her father. Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to
wait till we should come up. When we were close to her, she made us lie down in
the pits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Our
ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy seals was
most distressing [45] —who would go to bed with a sea
monster if he could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought
of something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under each
man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of the seals. [46] 




“We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the seals come
up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the old man of the sea
came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he went over them and counted
them. We were among the first he counted, and he never suspected any guile, but
laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had done counting. Then we rushed upon
him with a shout and seized him; on which he began at once with his old tricks,
and changed himself first into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden
he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was running
water, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him and never
lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became distressed, and said,
‘Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that hatched this plot with you for
snaring me and seizing me against my will? What do you want?’




“‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered, ‘you will gain nothing by
trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in this island,
and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing all heart; tell me,
then, for you gods know everything, which of the immortals it is that is
hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home?’




“Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly, you
must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before embarking; for
it is decreed that you shall not get back to your friends, and to your own
house, till you have returned to the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered
holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign in heaven. When you have done
this they will let you finish your voyage.’




“I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long and
terrible voyage to Egypt; [47] nevertheless, I answered, ‘I will do
all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me true,
whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we set sail from
Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them came to a bad end either
on board his own ship or among his friends when the days of his fighting were
done.’




“‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me? You had better not know what I can
tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard my story. Many of
those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many still remain, and only two
of the chief men among the Achaeans perished during their return home. As for
what happened on the field of battle—you were there yourself. A third Achaean
leader is still at sea, alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked,
for Neptune drove him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him
get safe out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva’s hatred he would have
escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting. He said the gods could
not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when Neptune heard this
large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawny hands, and split the rock
of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remained where it was, but the part on which
Ajax was sitting fell headlong into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he
drank salt water and was drowned.




“‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but when he was
just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught by a heavy gale
which carried him out to sea again sorely against his will, and drove him to
the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but where Aegisthus was then living.
By and by, however, it seemed as though he was to return safely after all, for
the gods backed the wind into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon
Agamemnon kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in
his own country.




“‘Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, and to whom
he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been looking out for a whole
year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the slip and prepare war;
when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he went and told Aegisthus, who
at once began to lay a plot for him. He picked twenty of his bravest warriors
and placed them in ambuscade on one side the cloister, while on the opposite
side he prepared a banquet. Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to
Agamemnon, and invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him
there, all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when
the banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles; not
one of Agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one of Aegisthus’, but
they were all killed there in the cloisters.’




“Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat down upon
the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear to live nor look
upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had had my fill of weeping and
writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea said, ‘Son of Atreus, do not
waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can do no manner of good; find
your way home as fast as ever you can, for Aegisthus may be still alive, and
even though Orestes has been beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet
come in for his funeral.’




“On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘I know, then,
about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom you spoke; is
he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is he dead? Tell me, no
matter how much it may grieve me.’




“‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I can see him
in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who is
keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for he has no ships nor
sailors to take him over the sea. As for your own end, Menelaus, you shall not
die in Argos, but the gods will take you to the Elysian plain, which is at the
ends of the world. There fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an
easier life than any where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not
rain, nor hail, nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings
softly from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. This will happen to you
because you have married Helen, and are Jove’s son-in-law.’




“As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the ships with
my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went along. When we
reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down
upon the beach. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew
our ships into the water, and put our masts and sails within them; then we went
on board ourselves, took our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with
our oars. I again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and
offered hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased
heaven’s anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that his name
might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for the gods sent
me a fair wind.




“And now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and I will then
speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of a chariot and three
horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice that so long as you live you
may think of me whenever you make a drink-offering to the immortal gods.”




“Son of Atreus,” replied Telemachus, “do not press me to stay longer; I should
be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; I find your
conversation so delightful that I should never once wish myself at home with my
parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos are already impatient, and you
are detaining me from them. As for any present you may be disposed to make me,
I had rather that it should be a piece of plate. I will take no horses back
with me to Ithaca, but will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have
much flat ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and
wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas in
Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country is more fit
for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that. [48] None of our
islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and Ithaca least of all.”




Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus’s hand within his own. “What you say,” said
he, “shows that you come of good family. I both can, and will, make this
exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most precious piece of plate in
all my house. It is a mixing bowl by Vulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except
the rim, which is inlaid with gold. Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it
me in the course of a visit which I paid him when I returned thither on my
homeward journey. I will make you a present of it.”




Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house. They
brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them to take
with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the courts]. [49] 




Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark on
the levelled ground in front of Ulysses’ house, and were behaving with all
their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who were their ringleaders and
much the foremost among them all, were sitting together when Noemon son of
Phronius came up and said to Antinous,




“Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos? He has
a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have twelve brood mares
there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet broken in, and I want to
bring one of them over here and break him.”




They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was only away
somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the swineherd; so
Antinous said, “When did he go? Tell me truly, and what young men did he take
with him? Were they freemen or his own bondsmen—for he might manage that too?
Tell me also, did you let him have the ship of your own free will because he
asked you, or did he take it without your leave?”




“I lent it him,” answered Noemon, “what else could I do when a man of his
position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him? I could not
possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they were the best young men we
have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain—or some god who was exactly like
him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor here myself yesterday morning,
and yet he was then setting out for Pylos.”




Noemon then went back to his father’s house, but Antinous and Eurymachus were
very angry. They told the others to leave off playing, and to come and sit down
along with themselves. When they came, Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke in
anger. His heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said:




“Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we had made
sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has got away in spite
of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be giving us trouble presently; may
Jove take him before he is full grown. Find me a ship, therefore, with a crew
of twenty men, and I will lie in wait for him in the straits between Ithaca and
Samos; he will then rue the day that he set out to try and get news of his
father.”




Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all of them
went inside the buildings.




It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were plotting; for a
man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the outer court as they were
laying their schemes within, and went to tell his mistress. As he crossed the
threshold of her room Penelope said: “Medon, what have the suitors sent you
here for? Is it to tell the maids to leave their master’s business and cook
dinner for them? I wish they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither
here nor anywhere else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you
all make of my son’s estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were
children, how good Ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed,
nor speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and they may
take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never did an unjust
thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and that there is no
such thing as gratitude left in this world.”




Then Medon said, “I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are plotting
something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate their design. They are
going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming home from Pylos and
Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his father.”




Then Penelope’s heart sank within her, and for a long time she was speechless;
her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance. At last, however,
she said, “Why did my son leave me? What business had he to go sailing off in
ships that make long voyages over the ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to
die without leaving any one behind him to keep up his name?”




“I do not know,” answered Medon, “whether some god set him on to it, or whether
he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if his father was dead,
or alive and on his way home.”




Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief. There
were plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart for sitting on any one
of them; she could only fling herself on the floor of her own room and cry;
whereon all the maids in the house, both old and young, gathered round her and
began to cry too, till at last in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed,




“My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction than any
other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave and lion-hearted
husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over
all Hellas and middle Argos, and now my darling son is at the mercy of the
winds and waves, without my having heard one word about his leaving home. You
hussies, there was not one of you would so much as think of giving me a call
out of my bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If I
had known he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no
matter how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him—one or
other. Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given me by my
father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at once and tell
everything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public
sympathy on our side, as against those who are trying to exterminate his own
race and that of Ulysses.”




Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, “You may kill me, Madam, or let me live
on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the real truth. I
knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in the way of bread and
wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I would not tell you anything for
some ten or twelve days, unless you asked or happened to hear of his having
gone, for he did not want you to spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam,
wash your face, change your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer
prayers to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him even
though he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he has trouble
enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate the race of the son
of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to come up after him, and
inherit both the house and the fair fields that lie far all round it.”




With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the tears
from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and went upstairs
with her maids. She then put some bruised barley into a basket and began
praying to Minerva.




“Hear me,” she cried, “Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable. If ever
Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or heifer, bear
it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son from the villainy of
the suitors.”




She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer; meanwhile the
suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister, and one of them said:




“The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us. Little does
she dream that her son has now been doomed to die.”




This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen. Then
Antinous said, “Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest some of it get
carried inside. Let us be up and do that in silence, about which we are all of
a mind.”




He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the sea side;
they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails inside her; they
bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due
course, and spread the white sails aloft, while their fine servants brought
them their armour. Then they made the ship fast a little way out, came on shore
again, got their suppers, and waited till night should fall.




But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and wondering
whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the wicked suitors.
Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen hemming her in on every side
she thought and thought till she sank into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft
of thought and motion.




Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in the likeness
of Penelope’s sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had married Eumelus and
lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to the house of Ulysses, and to make
Penelope leave off crying, so it came into her room by the hole through which
the thong went for pulling the door to, and hovered over her head saying,




“You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer you to
weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he will yet come back
to you.”




Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
“Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but I suppose that
is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, to leave off crying and
refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me? I, who have lost my brave
and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose
name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos; and now my darling son has
gone off on board of a ship—a foolish fellow who has never been used to
roughing it, nor to going about among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious
about him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him,
lest something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he has
gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against him, and are
bent on killing him before he can return home.”




Then the vision said, “Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There is one
gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand by his side, I
mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who has sent me to
bear you this message.”




“Then,” said Penelope, “if you are a god or have been sent here by divine
commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one—is he still alive, or is
he already dead and in the house of Hades?”




And the vision said, “I shall not tell you for certain whether he is alive or
dead, and there is no use in idle conversation.”




Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated into
thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted, so vivid
had been her dream.




Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea, intent
on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called Asteris, of no great
size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and there is a harbour on either
side of it where a ship can lie. Here then the Achaeans placed themselves in
ambush.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 5 ===

CALYPSO—ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.




And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus—harbinger of light alike
to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them, Jove the lord
of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began to tell them of the many
sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away there in the house of the nymph
Calypso.




“Father Jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live in everlasting
bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and well-disposed ruler
any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope they will be all henceforth
cruel and unjust, for there is not one of his subjects but has forgotten
Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were their father. There he is, lying in
great pain in an island where dwells the nymph Calypso, who will not let him
go; and he cannot get back to his own country, for he can find neither ships
nor sailors to take him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying
to murder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and
Lacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of his father.”




“What, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did you not send
him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses to get home and
punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able to protect Telemachus, and
to see him safely home again, while the suitors have to come hurry-skurrying
back without having killed him.”




When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, “Mercury, you are our
messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor Ulysses is
to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor men, but after a
perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to reach fertile Scheria, [50] the land of the
Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he
were one of ourselves. They will send him in a ship to his own country, and
will give him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back
from Troy, if he had had all his prize money and had got home without disaster.
This is how we have settled that he shall return to his country and his
friends.”




Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he was
told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which he could
fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wand with which he seals men’s
eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand
over Pieria; then he swooped down through the firmament till he reached the
level of the sea, whose waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing
every hole and corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the
spray. He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to the
island which was his journey’s end, he left the sea and went on by land till he
came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.




He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and one
could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal wood. As for
herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden shuttle through the warp
and singing beautifully. Round her cave there was a thick wood of alder,
poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees, wherein all kinds of great birds had
built their nests—owls, hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy their
business in the waters. A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew
luxuriantly about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills of
water in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so
as to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed.
[51] Even a god
could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood still
and looked at it; but when he had admired it sufficiently he went inside the
cave.




Calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, no matter how far
they live from one another—but Ulysses was not within; he was on the sea-shore
as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears in his eyes, groaning
and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso gave Mercury a seat and said: “Why
have you come to see me, Mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not
visit me often? Say what you want; I will do it for you at once if I can, and
if it can be done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before
you.”




As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed him
some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough, and then
said:




“We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why I have come
here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jove sent me; it was
no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all this way over the sea
where there are no cities full of people to offer me sacrifices or choice
hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods can cross
Jove, nor transgress his orders. He says that you have here the most
ill-starred of all those who fought nine years before the city of King Priam
and sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it. On their way home
they sinned against Minerva, [52] who raised both wind and waves
against them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone was
carried hither by wind and tide. Jove says that you are to let this man go at
once, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people,
but shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”




Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “You gods,” she exclaimed,
“ought to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous and hate seeing a
goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in open matrimony. So
when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious gods were all of you
furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia. So again when Ceres fell in
love with Iasion, and yielded to him in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, Jove
came to hear of it before so very long and killed Iasion with his thunderbolts.
And now you are angry with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor
creature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with
lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while he
himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island. I got fond of him and
cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal, so that he should
never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross Jove, nor bring his counsels
to nothing; therefore, if he insists upon it, let the man go beyond the seas
again; but I cannot send him anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men
who can take him. Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good
faith, as will be likely to bring him safely to his own country.”




“Then send him away,” said Mercury, “or Jove will be angry with you and punish
you”.




On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses, for she
had heard Jove’s message. She found him sitting upon the beach with his eyes
ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness; for he had got tired
of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with her in the cave by night, it
was she, not he, that would have it so. As for the day time, he spent it on the
rocks and on the sea shore, weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always
looking out upon the sea. Calypso then went close up to him said:




“My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your life out
any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will; so go, cut some
beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an upper deck that it may
carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread, wine, and water on board to
save you from starving. I will also give you clothes, and will send you a fair
wind to take you home, if the gods in heaven so will it—for they know more
about these things, and can settle them better than I can.”




Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. “Now goddess,” he answered, “there is
something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me home when
you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft. Not even a well
found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a distant voyage: nothing
that you can say or do shall make me go on board a raft unless you first
solemnly swear that you mean me no mischief.”




Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “You know a great deal,”
said she, “but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above and earth below be my
witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—and this is the most solemn oath
which a blessed god can take—that I mean you no sort of harm, and am only
advising you to do exactly what I should do myself in your place. I am dealing
with you quite straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very
sorry for you.”




When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses
followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on till they
came to Calypso’s cave, where Ulysses took the seat that Mercury had just left.
Calypso set meat and drink before him of the food that mortals eat; but her
maids brought ambrosia and nectar for herself, and they laid their hands on the
good things that were before them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat
and drink, Calypso spoke, saying:




“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own land at
once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how much suffering is
in store for you before you get back to your own country, you would stay where
you are, keep house along with me, and let me make you immortal, no matter how
anxious you may be to see this wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the
time day after day; yet I flatter myself that I am no whit less tall or
well-looking than she is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman
should compare in beauty with an immortal.”




“Goddess,” replied Ulysses, “do not be angry with me about this. I am quite
aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so beautiful as
yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal. Nevertheless, I
want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If some god wrecks me when I
am on the sea, I will bear it and make the best of it. I have had infinite
trouble both by land and sea already, so let this go with the rest.”




Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into the
inner part of the cave and went to bed. Odysseus checked his phone for a signal before addressing the Cyclops.




When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put on his shirt
and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer fabric, very fine
and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about her waist and a veil to
cover her head. She at once set herself to think how she could speed Ulysses on
his way. So she gave him a great bronze axe that suited his hands; it was
sharpened on both sides, and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on
to it. She also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of
the island where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached
the sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the water. [53] Then, when she
had shown him where the best trees grew, Calypso went home, leaving him to cut
them, which he soon finished doing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed
them smooth, squaring them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile
Calypso came back with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the
timbers together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled
shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he fixed a deck on top of the
ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast with a yard arm, and
a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all round with wicker hurdles as a
protection against the waves, and then he threw on a quantity of wood. By and
by Calypso brought him some linen to make the sails, and he made these too,
excellently, making them fast with braces and sheets. Last of all, with the
help of levers, he drew the raft down into the water.




In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso sent him
from the island after washing him and giving him some clean clothes. She gave
him a goat skin full of black wine, and another larger one of water; she also
gave him a wallet full of provisions, and found him in much good meat.
Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm for him, and gladly did Ulysses
spread his sail before it, while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by means
of the rudder. He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on
late-setting Bootes, and on the Bear—which men also call the wain, and which
turns round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into
the stream of Oceanus—for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left. Days
seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the dim outlines
of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian coast appeared, rising
like a shield on the horizon.




But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight of
Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could see him
sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged his head and
muttered to himself, saying, “Good heavens, so the gods have been changing
their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia, and now he is close to
the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed that he shall escape from the
calamities that have befallen him. Still, he shall have plenty of hardship yet
before he has done with it.”




Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred it round
in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till earth, sea, and
sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. Winds from
East, South, North, and West fell upon him all at the same time, and a
tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses’ heart began to fail him. “Alas,” he
said to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of me? I am afraid
Calypso was right when she said I should have trouble by sea before I got back
home. It is all coming true. How black is Jove making heaven with his clouds,
and what a sea the winds are raising from every quarter at once. I am now safe
to perish. Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in
the cause of the sons of Atreus. Would that I had been killed on the day when
the Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, for
then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honoured my name;
but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end.”




As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft reeled
again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let go the helm, and the
force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the mast half way up, and
both sail and yard went over into the sea. For a long time Ulysses was under
water, and it was all he could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothes
Calypso had given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above water
and spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams. In
spite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast
as he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to
escape drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn winds
whirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as though the South,
North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with it
at once.




When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea, saw
him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised to the rank
of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great distress Ulysses now was, she had
compassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull from the waves, took her seat
upon the raft.




“My poor good man,” said she, “why is Neptune so furiously angry with you? He
is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster he will not kill
you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as I bid you; strip, leave your
raft to drive before the wind, and swim to the Phaeacian coast where better
luck awaits you. And here, take my veil and put it round your chest; it is
enchanted, and you can come to no harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you
touch land take it off, throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then
go away again.” With these words she took off her veil and gave it him. Then
she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.




But Ulysses did not know what to think. “Alas,” he said to himself in his
dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring me to ruin by
advising me to quit my raft. At any rate I will not do so at present, for the
land where she said I should be quit of all troubles seemed to be still a good
way off. I know what I will do—I am sure it will be best—no matter what happens
I will stick to the raft as long as her timbers hold together, but when the sea
breaks her up I will swim for it; I do not see how I can do any better than
this.”




While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that seemed
to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft, which then
went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed about by a
whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it as if he were on
horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso had given him, bound Ino’s veil
under his arms, and plunged into the sea—meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune
watched him as he did so, and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying,
“There now, swim up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do
people. I do not think you will be able to say that I have let you off too
lightly.” On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where his palace is.




But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the winds
except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good stiff breeze
from the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses reached the land of the
Phaeacians where he would be safe.




Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with a heavy
swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when the third day
broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so much as a breath of
air stirring. As he rose on the swell he looked eagerly ahead, and could see
land quite near. Then, as children rejoice when their dear father begins to get
better after having for a long time borne sore affliction sent him by some
angry spirit, but the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when
he again saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might
once more set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, he
began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell still
broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was enveloped in spray;
there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter of any kind, but
only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.




Ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to himself,
“Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I had given up all
hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast is rocky and surf-beaten,
the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the sea, with deep water close under
them so that I cannot climb out for want of foot hold. I am afraid some great
wave will lift me off my legs and dash me against the rocks as I leave the
water—which would give me a sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim
further in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me
out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster
of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know that
Neptune is very angry with me.”




While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such force
against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to pieces if Minerva
had not shown him what to do. He caught hold of the rock with both hands and
clung to it groaning with pain till the wave retired, so he was saved that
time; but presently the wave came on again and carried him back with it far
into the sea—tearing his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some
one plucks it from its bed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did
the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep
down under the water.




Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his own
destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him. He swam
seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating against the land, and
at the same time he kept looking towards the shore to see if he could find some
haven, or a spit that should take the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on,
he came to the mouth of a river, and here he thought would be the best place,
for there were no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that
there was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said:




“Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of the sea-god
Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has lost his way has at
all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my distress I draw near to
your stream, and cling to the knees of your riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O
king, for I declare myself your suppliant.”




Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm before
him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here at last Ulysses’
knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had completely broken him. His
body was all swollen, and his mouth and nostrils ran down like a river with
sea-water, so that he could neither breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from
sheer exhaustion; presently, when he had got his breath and came to himself
again, he took off the scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the
salt [54] stream of
the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave that bore it
towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down among the rushes, and
kissed the bounteous earth.




“Alas,” he cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of me, and
how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed through the long
watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter cold and damp may make
an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be a keen wind blowing from off the
river. If, on the other hand, I climb the hill side, find shelter in the woods,
and sleep in some thicket, I may escape the cold and have a good night’s rest,
but some savage beast may take advantage of me and devour me.”




In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one upon some
high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath two shoots of olive
that grew from a single stock—the one an ungrafted sucker, while the other had
been grafted. No wind, however squally, could break through the cover they
afforded, nor could the sun’s rays pierce them, nor the rain get through them,
so closely did they grow into one another. Ulysses crept under these and began
to make himself a bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves
lying about—enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard winter
weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself down and heaped the
leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone in the country, far from any
neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the ashes to save himself from having
to get a light elsewhere, even so did Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and
Minerva shed a sweet sleep upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose
all memories of his sorrows.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 6 ===

THE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.




So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off to the
country and city of the Phaeacians—a people who used to live in the fair town
of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes were stronger than
they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous moved them thence and settled
them in Scheria, far from all other people. He surrounded the city with a wall,
built houses and temples, and divided the lands among his people; but he was
dead and gone to the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were
inspired of heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hie in
furtherance of the return of Ulysses.




She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there slept a
girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King Alcinous. Two
maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty, one on either side of
the doorway, which was closed with well made folding doors. Minerva took the
form of the famous sea captain Dymas’s daughter, who was a bosom friend of
Nausicaa and just her own age; then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like a
breath of wind, she hovered over her head and said:




“Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy daughter?
Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are going to be married
almost immediately, and should not only be well dressed yourself, but should
find good clothes for those who attend you. This is the way to get yourself a
good name, and to make your father and mother proud of you. Suppose, then, that
we make tomorrow a washing day, and start at daybreak. I will come and help you
so that you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best
young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going to
remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have a waggon and
mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and girdles, and you
can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you than walking, for the
washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”




When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say is the
everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and neither rain nor
snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine and in a great
peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are illumined for ever and
ever. This was the place to which the goddess went when she had given
instructions to the girl.




By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about her dream;
she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her father and mother
all about it, and found them in their own room. Her mother was sitting by the
fireside spinning her purple yarn with her maids around her, and she happened
to catch her father just as he was going out to attend a meeting of the town
council, which the Phaeacian aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:




“Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want to take
all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are the chief man here,
so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt when you attend meetings
of the council. Moreover, you have five sons at home, two of them married,
while the other three are good looking bachelors; you know they always like to
have clean linen when they go to a dance, and I have been thinking about all
this.”




She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to, but her
father knew and said, “You shall have the mules, my love, and whatever else you
have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shall get you a good strong
waggon with a body to it that will hold all your clothes.”




On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out, harnessed
the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes down from the
linen room and placed them on the waggon. Her mother prepared her a basket of
provisions with all sorts of good things, and a goat skin full of wine; the
girl now got into the waggon, and her mother gave her also a golden cruse of
oil, that she and her women might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip and
reins and lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered
on the road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa and
her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.




When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns, through
which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any quantity of linen,
no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mules and turned them out to
feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the water side. They took the
clothes out of the waggon, put them in the water, and vied with one another in
treading them in the pits to get the dirt out. After they had washed them and
got them quite clean, they laid them out by the sea side, where the waves had
raised a high beach of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing
themselves with olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of the
stream, and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had done
dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to play at
ball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goes forth upon the
mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer, and the wood
nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their sport along with her (then
is Leto proud at seeing her daughter stand a full head taller than the others,
and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl
outshine her handmaids.




When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the clothes and
putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how Ulysses should wake
up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him to the city of the
Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one of the maids, which missed
her and fell into deep water. On this they all shouted, and the noise they made
woke Ulysses, who sat up in his bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might
all be.




“Alas,” said he to himself, “what kind of people have I come amongst? Are they
cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? I seem to hear the
voices of young women, and they sound like those of the nymphs that haunt
mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass. At any rate I
am among a race of men and women. Let me try if I cannot manage to get a look
at them.”




As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough covered
with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some lion of the
wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and defying both wind and
rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is
famished, and will dare break even into a well fenced homestead, trying to get
at the sheep—even such did Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to
them all naked as he was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt
and so begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that
jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, for Minerva
put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. She stood right in
front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up to her, throw himself
at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or stay where he was and
entreat her to give him some clothes and show him the way to the town. In the
end he deemed it best to entreat her from a distance in case the girl should
take offence at his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her
in honeyed and persuasive language.




“O queen,” he said, “I implore your aid—but tell me, are you a goddess or are
you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, I can only
conjecture that you are Jove’s daughter Diana, for your face and figure
resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a mortal and live on
earth, thrice happy are your father and mother—thrice happy, too, are your
brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted they must feel when they see so
fair a scion as yourself going out to a dance; most happy, however, of all will
he be whose wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own
home. I never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am lost
in admiration as I behold you. I can only compare you to a young palm tree
which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar of Apollo—for I was
there, too, with much people after me, when I was on that journey which has
been the source of all my troubles. Never yet did such a young plant shoot out
of the ground as that was, and I admired and wondered at it exactly as I now
admire and wonder at yourself. I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great
distress; yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon
the sea. The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygian
island, [55] and now
fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endure still further suffering;
for I do not think that I have yet come to the end of it, but rather that
heaven has still much evil in store for me.




“And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I have met,
and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way to your town, and let
me have anything that you may have brought hither to wrap your clothes in. May
heaven grant you in all things your heart’s desire—husband, house, and a happy,
peaceful home; for there is nothing better in this world than that man and wife
should be of one mind in a house. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts
of their friends glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.”




To this Nausicaa answered, “Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,
well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives prosperity to
rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what he has seen fit to send
you, and make the best of it. Now, however, that you have come to this our
country, you shall not want for clothes nor for anything else that a foreigner
in distress may reasonably look for. I will show you the way to the town, and
will tell you the name of our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am
daughter to Alcinous, in whom the whole power of the state is vested.”




Then she called her maids and said, “Stay where you are, you girls. Can you not
see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for a robber or a
murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to do us Phaeacians any
harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on a land’s end that juts
into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do with any other people. This is
only some poor man who has lost his way, and we must be kind to him, for
strangers and foreigners in distress are under Jove’s protection, and will take
what they can get and be thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to
eat and drink, and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from
the wind.”




On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another back.
They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told them, and
brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the little golden cruse of
oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream. But Ulysses said, “Young women,
please to stand a little on one side that I may wash the brine from my
shoulders and anoint myself with oil, for it is long enough since my skin has
had a drop of oil upon it. I cannot wash as long as you all keep standing
there. I am ashamed to strip [56] before a number of good looking young
women.”




Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses washed
himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and from his broad
shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, and had got the brine out of
his hair, he anointed himself with oil, and put on the clothes which the girl
had given him; Minerva then made him look taller and stronger than before, she
also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls
like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a
skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva
enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty.
Then he went and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite young
and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said to her
maids:




“Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who live in
heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first saw him I thought him
plain, but now his appearance is like that of the gods who dwell in heaven. I
should like my future husband to be just such another as he is, if he would
only stay here and not want to go away. However, give him something to eat and
drink.”




They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and drank
ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind. Meanwhile,
Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen folded and placed
in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she took her seat, she called
Ulysses:




“Stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; I will
introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I can tell you that
you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians. But be sure and do as I
bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person. As long as we are going past the
fields and farm lands, follow briskly behind the waggon along with the maids
and I will lead the way myself. Presently, however, we shall come to the town,
where you will find a high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on
either side with a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn
up by the road side, for every one has a place where his own ship can lie. You
will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it, and
paved with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people deal in ship’s gear of
all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are the places where oars
are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of archers; they know nothing
about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring folk, and pride themselves on their
masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel far over the sea.




“I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against me later
on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low fellow, if he met
us, might say, ‘Who is this fine-looking stranger that is going about with
Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I suppose she is going to marry him. Perhaps
he is a vagabond sailor whom she has taken from some foreign vessel, for we
have no neighbours; or some god has at last come down from heaven in answer to
her prayers, and she is going to live with him all the rest of her life. It
would be a good thing if she would take herself off and find a husband
somewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent young
Phaeacians who are in love with her.’ This is the kind of disparaging remark
that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for I should myself be
scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with men in
spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still alive, and without
having been married in the face of all the world.




“If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help you home,
do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by the road side
dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow all round it. Here my
father has a field of rich garden ground, about as far from the town as a man’s
voice will carry. Sit down there and wait for a while till the rest of us can
get into the town and reach my father’s house. Then, when you think we must
have done this, come into the town and ask the way to the house of my father
Alcinous. You will have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it
out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything like such a fine
house as he has. When you have got past the gates and through the outer court,
go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. You will find her
sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by firelight. It is a fine
sight to see her as she leans back against one of the bearing-posts with her
maids all ranged behind her. Close to her seat stands that of my father, on
which he sits and topes like an immortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my
mother, and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If you
can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again, no matter how
distant it may be.”




So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river. The mules
drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road. She was careful not
to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were following on foot along with
the waggon, so she plied her whip with judgement. As the sun was going down
they came to the sacred grove of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed
to the mighty daughter of Jove.




“Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hear me now,
for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking me. Now,
therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends and be
hospitably received by the Phaeacians.”




Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show herself
to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was still furious
in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 7 ===

RECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.




Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the town. When
she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway, and her
brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules out of the
waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she went to her own room,
where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit the fire for her. This old
woman had been brought by sea from Apeira, and had been chosen as a prize for
Alcinous because he was king over the Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as
though he were a god. [57] She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and
had now lit the fire for her, and brought her supper for her into her own room.




Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a thick mist
all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaeacians who met him
should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as he was just entering the
town, she came towards him in the likeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher.
She stood right in front of him, and Ulysses said:




“My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous? I am an
unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your town and
country.”




Then Minerva said, “Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you want,
for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before you and show
the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look at any man, nor ask him
questions; for the people here cannot abide strangers, and do not like men who
come from some other place. They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by
the grace of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird in
the air.”




On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one of the
Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the midst of them;
for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards him had hidden him in a
thick cloud of darkness. He admired their harbours, ships, places of assembly,
and the lofty walls of the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, were
very striking, and when they reached the king’s house Minerva said:




“This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you. You will
find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be afraid; go
straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to carry his point,
even though he is a stranger. First find the queen. Her name is Arete, and she
comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous. They both descend originally
from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous by Periboea, a woman of great
beauty. Periboea was the youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time
reigned over the giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own
life to boot.




“Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the great
Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had two sons Rhexenor
and Alcinous; [58] 
Apollo killed the first of them while he was still a bridegroom and without
male issue; but he left a daughter Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as
no other woman is honoured of all those that keep house along with their
husbands.




“Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her children, by
Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon her as a goddess, and
greet her whenever she goes about the city, for she is a thoroughly good woman
both in head and heart, and when any women are friends of hers, she will help
their husbands also to settle their disputes. If you can gain her good will,
you may have every hope of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back
to your home and country.”




Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to Marathon [59] and to the
spacious streets of Athens, where she entered the abode of Erechtheus; but
Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous, and he pondered much as he paused a
while before reaching the threshold of bronze, for the splendour of the palace
was like that of the sun or moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from
end to end, and the cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung
on pillars of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was
silver and the hook of the door was of gold.




On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with his
consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the palace of king
Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old. Seats were ranged all
along the wall, here and there from one end to the other, with coverings of
fine woven work which the women of the house had made. Here the chief persons
of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all
seasons; and there were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in
their hands, raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at
table. There are [60] fifty maid servants in the house,
some of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others
work at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards
like the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that
it will turn oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so their
women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner of
useful arts, and they are very intelligent.




Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about four acres
with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful trees—pears, pomegranates,
and the most delicious apples. There are luscious figs also, and olives in full
growth. The fruits never rot nor fail all the year round, neither winter nor
summer, for the air is so soft that a new crop ripens before the old has
dropped. Pear grows on pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with
the grapes, for there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part
of this, the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on have shed
their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again are just changing
colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are beautifully arranged beds
of flowers that are in bloom all the year round. Two streams go through it, the
one turned in ducts throughout the whole garden, while the other is carried
under the ground of the outer court to the house itself, and the town’s people
draw water from it. Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had
endowed the house of king Alcinous.




So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had looked
long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the precincts of the
house. There he found all the chief people among the Phaeacians making their
drink offerings to Mercury, which they always did the last thing before going
away for the night. [61] He went straight through the court,
still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which Minerva had enveloped him, till
he reached Arete and King Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of
the queen, and at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he
became visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there,
but Ulysses began at once with his petition.




“Queen Arete,” he exclaimed, “daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress I
humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom may heaven
prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave their possessions to
their children, and all the honours conferred upon them by the state) to help
me home to my own country as soon as possible; for I have been long in trouble
and away from my friends.”




Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their peace,
till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent speaker and an elder
among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus:




“Alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that a stranger should be
seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is waiting to hear what
you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take a seat on a stool inlaid
with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine and water that we may make a
drink offering to Jove the lord of thunder, who takes all well disposed
suppliants under his protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper,
of whatever there may be in the house.”




When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from the
hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting beside
him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought him water in a
beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for him to wash his
hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper servant brought him
bread and offered him many good things of what there was in the house, and
Ulysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous said to one of the servants, “Pontonous,
mix a cup of wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove
the lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.”




Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man
his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and had drunk each as
much as he was minded, Alcinous said:




“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You have had
your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall invite a still
larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial banquet in honour of our
guest; we can then discuss the question of his escort, and consider how we may
at once send him back rejoicing to his own country without trouble or
inconvenience to himself, no matter how distant it may be. We must see that he
comes to no harm while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home he
will have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like other
people. It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who
has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are departing
from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made themselves perfectly
clear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs. They come and sit at our
feasts just like one of our selves, and if any solitary wayfarer happens to
stumble upon some one or other of them, they affect no concealment, for we are
as near of kin to the gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are.” [62] 




Then Ulysses said: “Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into your head.
I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor mind, and most
resemble those among you who are the most afflicted. Indeed, were I to tell you
all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me, you would say that I was still
worse off than they are. Nevertheless, let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an
empty stomach is a very importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man’s notice
no matter how dire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that
I shall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell
only on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose,
and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shall be content to die
if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and all the greatness
of my house.” [63] 




Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he should
have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when they had made
their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded they went
home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving Ulysses in the cloister with
Arete and Alcinous while the servants were taking the things away after supper.
Arete was the first to speak, for she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good
clothes that Ulysses was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so
she said, “Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should
like to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes? Did
you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”




And Ulysses answered, “It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate in full
the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavy upon me;
but as regards your question, there is an island far away in the sea which is
called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells the cunning and powerful goddess Calypso,
daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself far from all neighbours human or
divine. Fortune, however, brought me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for
Jove struck my ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My
brave comrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was
carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the
darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island where the
great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in and treated me with the utmost
kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal that I might never grow old,
but she could not persuade me to let her do so.




“I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the good
clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last when the
eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will, either because
Jove had told her she must, or because she had changed her mind. She sent me
from her island on a raft, which she provisioned with abundance of bread and
wine. Moreover she gave me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew
both warm and fair. Days seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the
eighteenth I caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your
coast—and glad indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still
much trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no
further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that
I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of the
gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to your
shores.




“There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the waves
dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam on till I came
to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for there were no rocks
and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then, I got out of the water and
gathered my senses together again. Night was coming on, so I left the river,
and went into a thicket, where I covered myself all over with leaves, and
presently heaven sent me off into a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I
slept among the leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when
I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playing
upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. I besought
her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition, much more so than
could be expected from so young a person—for young people are apt to be
thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine, and when she had had me
washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in which you see me. Now,
therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told you the whole truth.”




Then Alcinous said, “Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to bring
you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she was the first
person whose aid you asked.”




“Pray do not scold her,” replied Ulysses; “she is not to blame. She did tell me
to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid, for I thought you
might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Every human being is sometimes a
little suspicious and irritable.”




“Stranger,” replied Alcinous, “I am not the kind of man to get angry about
nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father Jove, Minerva, and
Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and how much you think as I
do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter, and become my son-in-law. If
you will stay I will give you a house and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid)
shall keep you here against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I
will attend tomorrow to the matter of your escort. You can sleep [64] during the whole
voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters either to
your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a long way further off
than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when they took yellow-haired
Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is the furthest of any
place—and yet they did the whole voyage in a single day without distressing
themselves, and came back again afterwards. You will thus see how much my ships
excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.”




Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “Father Jove, grant that
Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable name
among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country.”




Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the room that
was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to spread coverlets
on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to wear. The maids thereon
went out with torches in their hands, and when they had made the bed they came
up to Ulysses and said, “Rise, sir stranger, and come with us for your bed is
ready,” and glad indeed was he to go to his rest.




So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; but
Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by his
side.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 8 ===

BANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS—THE GAMES.




Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous and
Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian place of assembly,
which was near the ships. When they got there they sat down side by side on a
seat of polished stone, while Minerva took the form of one of Alcinous’
servants, and went round the town in order to help Ulysses to get home. She
went up to the citizens, man by man, and said, “Aldermen and town councillors
of the Phaeacians, come to the assembly all of you and listen to the stranger
who has just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks
like an immortal god.”




With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to the
assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every one was struck
with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified him about the head
and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he really was, that he
might impress the Phaeacians favourably as being a very remarkable man, and
might come off well in the many trials of skill to which they would challenge
him. Then, when they were got together, Alcinous spoke:




“Hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, that I
may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may be, has found his
way to my house from somewhere or other either East or West. He wants an escort
and wishes to have the matter settled. Let us then get one ready for him, as we
have done for others before him; indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house
has been able to complain of me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us
draw a ship into the sea—one that has never yet made a voyage—and man her with
two and fifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you have made fast your
oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to prepare a
feast. [65] I will
find you in everything. I am giving these instructions to the young men who
will form the crew, for as regards you aldermen and town councillors, you will
join me in entertaining our guest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and
we will have Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he
may choose to sing about.”




Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a servant went
to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to the sea shore as they
had been told, and when they got there they drew the ship into the water, got
her mast and sails inside her, bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft. They
moored the vessel a little way out from land, and then came on shore and went
to the house of King Alcinous. The out houses, [66] yards, and all the precincts were
filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and Alcinous
killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen. These they
skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet.




A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had dearly
loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though she had endowed
him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of his eyesight. Pontonous
set a seat for him among the guests, leaning it up against a bearing-post. He
hung the lyre for him on a peg over his head, and showed him where he was to
feel for it with his hands. He also set a fair table with a basket of victuals
by his side, and a cup of wine from which he might drink whenever he was so
disposed.




The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,
but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse inspired
Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a matter that was
then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel between Ulysses and
Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on one another as they sat
together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was glad when he heard his chieftains
quarrelling with one another, for Apollo had foretold him this at Pytho when he
crossed the stone floor to consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the
evil that by the will of Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.




Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head and
covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that he was
weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from his eyes,
uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering to the gods; but
when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further, for they delighted in
his lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly.
No one noticed his distress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and
heard the heavy sighs that he was heaving. So he at once said, “Aldermen and
town councillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the feast,
and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us proceed therefore
to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his return home may be able to
tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as boxers, wrestlers,
jumpers, and runners.”




With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A servant hung
Demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the cloister, and set him
on the same way as that along which all the chief men of the Phaeacians were
going to see the sports; a crowd of several thousands of people followed them,
and there were many excellent competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos,
Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus,
Thoon, Anabesineus, and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also
Euryalus son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking
man among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas,
Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.




The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the starting
post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew forward at the
same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he left every one else
behind him by the length of the furrow that a couple of mules can plough in a
fallow field. [67] 
They then turned to the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to
be the best man. Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at
throwing the disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous’s son
Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, when they had
all been diverted with the games, “Let us ask the stranger whether he excels in
any of these sports; he seems very powerfully built; his thighs, calves, hands,
and neck are of prodigious strength, nor is he at all old, but he has suffered
much lately, and there is nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no
matter how strong he is.”




“You are quite right, Laodamas,” replied Euryalus, “go up to your guest and
speak to him about it yourself.”




When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd and said
to Ulysses, “I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for some one or other of
our competitions if you are skilled in any of them—and you must have gone in
for many a one before now. There is nothing that does any one so much credit
all his life long as the showing himself a proper man with his hands and feet.
Have a try therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. Your
return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn into the
water, and the crew is found.”




Ulysses answered, “Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind is set
rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite trouble, and am
come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and people to further me
on my return home.”




Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, “I gather, then, that you are
unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in. I suppose
you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships as captains or
merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward freights and homeward
cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the athlete about you.”




“For shame, Sir,” answered Ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolent fellow—so
true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in speech, person, and
understanding. One man may be of weak presence, but heaven has adorned this
with such a good conversation that he charms every one who sees him; his
honeyed moderation carries his hearers with him so that he is leader in all
assemblies of his fellows, and wherever he goes he is looked up to. Another may
be as handsome as a god, but his good looks are not crowned with discretion.
This is your case. No god could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but
you are a fool. Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you
are quite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed, so
long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of the age.
Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I have gone through much
both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; still, in spite
of all this I will compete, for your taunts have stung me to the quick.”




So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc, larger,
more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians when
disc-throwing among themselves. [68] Then, swinging it back, he threw it
from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he did so. The
Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it sped gracefully from
his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been made yet. Minerva, in the form
of a man, came and marked the place where it had fallen. “A blind man, Sir,”
said she, “could easily tell your mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of
any other. You may make your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can
come near to such a throw as yours.”




Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, so he
began to speak more pleasantly. “Young men,” said he, “come up to that throw if
you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or even heavier. If anyone
wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I am exceedingly angry; I
will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it is, with any man of you all
except Laodamas, but not with him because I am his guest, and one cannot
compete with one’s own personal friend. At least I do not think it a prudent or
a sensible thing for a guest to challenge his host’s family at any game,
especially when he is in a foreign country. He will cut the ground from under
his own feet if he does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I
want to have the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good hand at
every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. I am an excellent archer. In
battle I am always the first to bring a man down with my arrow, no matter how
many more are taking aim at him alongside of me. Philoctetes was the only man
who could shoot better than I could when we Achaeans were before Troy and in
practice. I far excel every one else in the whole world, of those who still eat
bread upon the face of the earth, but I should not like to shoot against the
mighty dead, such as Hercules, or Eurytus the Oechalian—men who could shoot
against the gods themselves. This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by
his end, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged him
as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an arrow.
Running is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of the
Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at sea; my
provisions ran short, and therefore I am still weak.”




They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, we have had
much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which I understand
that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been displeased with some
insolent remarks that have been made to you by one of our athletes, and which
could never have been uttered by any one who knows how to talk with propriety.
I hope you will apprehend my meaning, and will explain to any one of your chief
men who may be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that we
have an hereditary aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not
particularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are
singularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of
good dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen, warm
baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best dancers set
about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his
friends how much we surpass all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, and
minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other of
you and fetch it for him.”




On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house, and the
nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was their business
to manage everything connected with the sports, so they made the ground smooth
and marked a wide space for the dancers. Presently the servant came back with
Demodocus’s lyre, and he took his place in the midst of them, whereon the best
young dancers in the town began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was
delighted with the merry twinkling of their feet.




Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how they
first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus many
presents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who saw what they
were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he heard such dreadful
news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief, got his great anvil into its
place, and began to forge some chains which none could either unloose or break,
so that they might stay there in that place. [69] When he had finished his snare he
went into his bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like
cobwebs; he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not
even a god could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had
spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting out for
the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was the one he was
most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as soon as he saw him start,
hurried off to his house, burning with love for Venus.




Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was about
sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took her hand in
his own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at home, but is gone off
to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is barbarous.”




She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest, whereon
they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread for them, and
could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too late that they were
in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had turned back before reaching
Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him what was going on. He was in a furious
passion, and stood in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to
all the gods.




“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for ever,
come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I will show you.
Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because I am lame. She is in
love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built, whereas I am a cripple—but my
parents are to blame for that, not I; they ought never to have begotten me.
Come and see the pair together asleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at
them. They are very fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there
longer than they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there,
however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave him for
his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest.”




On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling Neptune
came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the goddesses staid
at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all good things stood in the
doorway, and the blessed gods roared with inextinguishable laughter, as they
saw how cunning Vulcan had been, whereon one would turn towards his neighbour
saying:




“Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how limping
Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god in heaven; and
now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.”




Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “Messenger Mercury,
giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains were, would you,
if you could sleep with Venus?”




“King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get the chance, though
there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all of you, gods
and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could.”




The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune took it all
seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free again. “Let him go,”
he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require, that he shall pay you all the
damages that are held reasonable among the immortal gods.”




“Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a bad man’s bond is bad security;
what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go away and leave his
debts behind him along with his chains?”




“Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying his damages, I will
pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this case I cannot and must not refuse
you.”




Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were free they
scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to Cyprus and to
Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with burnt offerings. Here
the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil of ambrosia such as the
immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her in raiment of the most
enchanting beauty.




Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were charmed
as they heard him.




Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no one to
compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had made for them, and
one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up towards the clouds, while
the other jumped from off the ground and caught it with ease before it came
down again. When they had done throwing the ball straight up into the air they
began to dance, and at the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards
to one another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a great
stamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said:




“King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the world,
and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was astonished as I saw
them.”




The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians, “Aldermen and
town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of singular judgement; let us
give him such proof of our hospitality as he may reasonably expect. There are
twelve chief men among you, and counting myself there are thirteen; contribute,
each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him
all this in a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so
with a light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology and a
present too, for he has been rude.”




Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and sent their
servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, “King Alcinous, I will give
the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He shall have my sword, which is
of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of silver. I will also give him the
scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which it fits. It will be worth a great deal
to him.”




As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Good luck to
you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the winds blow it
away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return, for I understand you
have been long away from home, and have gone through much hardship.”




To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may the gods
grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you have given me
along with your apology.”




With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards sundown
the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of the donors kept
bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his sons received them, and
placed them under their mother’s charge. Then Alcinous led the way to the house
and bade his guests take their seats.




“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the best chest we have, and
put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on the fire and heat some
water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to the careful packing of the
presents that the noble Phaeacians have made him; he will thus better enjoy
both his supper and the singing that will follow. I shall myself give him this
golden goblet—which is of exquisite workmanship—that he may be reminded of me
for the rest of his life whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any
of the gods.” [70] 




Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast as they
could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire; they
threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played
about the belly of the tripod. [71] Meanwhile Arete brought a magnificent
chest from her own room, and inside it she packed all the beautiful presents of
gold and raiment which the Phaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and
a good shirt from Alcinous, and said to Ulysses:




“See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for fear any
one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your ship.” [72] 




When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast with a
bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper servant told him
to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad of a warm bath, for he
had had no one to wait upon him ever since he left the house of Calypso, who as
long as he remained with her had taken as good care of him as though he had
been a god. When the servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and
had given him a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the
guests who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the
bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as she saw
him pass. “Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget me when you are safe at
home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom for having saved your
life.”




And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the mighty
husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I bless you as my
guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved me.”




When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was then
served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the favourite
bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near one of the
bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean against it. Then
Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of fat (for there was
abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant, “Take this piece of pork
over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for all the pain his lays may cause
me I will salute him none the less; bards are honoured and respected throughout
the world, for the muse teaches them their songs and loves them.”




The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took it and
was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good things that were
before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses said to
Demodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in the world whom I admire more than I
do you. You must have studied under the Muse, Jove’s daughter, and under
Apollo, so accurately do you sing the return of the Achaeans with all their
sufferings and adventures. If you were not there yourself, you must have heard
it all from some one who was. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the
wooden horse which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses
got by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who
afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will tell all
the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”




The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some of the
Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others, hidden within the
horse, [73] were
waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place of assembly. For the Trojans
themselves had drawn the horse into their fortress, and it stood there while
they sat in council round it, and were in three minds as to what they should
do. Some were for breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged
to the top of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the
precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering and
propitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the end, for the
city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all the bravest
of the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction on the Trojans. Anon he
sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from the horse, and sacked the town,
breaking out from their ambuscade. He sang how they overran the city hither and
thither and ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with
Menelaus to the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged most
furiously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.




All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his cheeks were
wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws herself on the body of
her husband who has fallen before his own city and people, fighting bravely in
defence of his home and children. She screams aloud and flings her arms about
him as he lies gasping for breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from
behind about the back and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life
of labour and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously
did Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs that he
was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:




“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease his song,
for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From the moment that we
had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our guest has been all the time
groaning and lamenting. He is evidently in great trouble, so let the bard leave
off, that we may all enjoy ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much
more as it should be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the
presents that we are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour,
and any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to
treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.




“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor reserve in
the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more polite in you to give
me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your father and mother over yonder
used to call you, and by which you were known among your neighbours and
fellow-citizens. There is no one, neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely
without any name whatever, for people’s fathers and mothers give them names as
soon as they are born. Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our
ships may shape their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the
Phaeacians have no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other
nations have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are
thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the whole
world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is covered with mist
and cloud, so that there is no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm.
Still I do remember hearing my father say that Neptune was angry with us for
being too easy-going in the matter of giving people escorts. He said that one
of these days he should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having
escorted some one, [74] and bury our city under a high
mountain. This is what my father used to say, but whether the god will carry
out his threat or no is a matter which he will decide for himself.




“And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and in what
countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples themselves, and of their
cities—who were hostile, savage and uncivilised, and who, on the other hand,
hospitable and humane. Tell us also why you are made so unhappy on hearing
about the return of the Argive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged all this,
and sent them their misfortunes in order that future generations might have
something to sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when
you were before Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest
relations a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some brave and
kindly-natured comrade—for a good friend is as dear to a man as his own
brother?”

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 9 ===

ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI, AND
CYCLOPES.




And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard with
such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or more delightful
than when a whole people make merry together, with the guests sitting orderly
to listen, while the table is loaded with bread and meats, and the cup-bearer
draws wine and fills his cup for every man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a
man can see. Now, however, since you are inclined to ask the story of my
sorrows, and rekindle my own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how
to begin, nor yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven
has been laid heavily upon me.




“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and one day,
if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though I live so far
away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes, renowned among mankind for
all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca,
where there is a high mountain called Neritum, covered with forests; and not
far from it there is a group of islands very near to one another—Dulichium,
Same, and the wooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all
highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
towards dawn. [75] 
It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know none that they
better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso kept me with her in her cave, and
wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they
could neither of them persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than
his own country and his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a
foreign country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it.
Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove’s
will I met with on my return from Troy.




“When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is the
city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to the sword. We
took their wives and also much booty, which we divided equitably amongst us, so
that none might have reason to complain. I then said that we had better make
off at once, but my men very foolishly would not obey me, so they staid there
drinking much wine and killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea
shore. Meanwhile the Cicons cried out for help to other Cicons who lived
inland. These were more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in
the art of war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the
occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as leaves and
bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were hard
pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts aimed their
bronze-shod spears at one another. [76] So long as the day waxed and it was
still morning, we held our own against them, though they were more in number
than we; but as the sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen,
the Cicons got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship
we had; so we got away with those that were left.




“Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped
death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we had thrice
invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the hands of the
Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it blew a hurricane, so
that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of
the heavens. We let the ships run before the gale, but the force of the wind
tore our sails to tatters, so we took them down for fear of shipwreck, and
rowed our hardest towards the land. There we lay two days and two nights
suffering much alike from toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the
third day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the
wind and steersmen direct our ship. I should have got home at that time
unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against me as I was
doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of Cythera.




“I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the sea, but
on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who live on a food
that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take in fresh water, and
our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near the ships. When they had
eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to see what manner of men the people
of the place might be, and they had a third man under them. They started at
once, and went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave
them to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate of it left
off caring about home, and did not even want to go back and say what had
happened to them, but were for staying and munching lotus [77] with the Lotus-eaters without
thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept bitterly I
forced them back to the ships and made them fast under the benches. Then I told
the rest to go on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus and
leave off wanting to get home, so they took their places and smote the grey sea
with their oars.




“We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of the
lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor plough, but
trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and grapes as grow wild
without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes yield them wine as the sun
and the rain may grow them. They have no laws nor assemblies of the people, but
live in caves on the tops of high mountains; each is lord and master in his
family, and they take no account of their neighbours.




“Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite close
to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-run with wild goats,
that breed there in great numbers and are never disturbed by foot of man; for
sportsmen—who as a rule will suffer so much hardship in forest or among
mountain precipices—do not go there, nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed
down, but it lies a wilderness untilled and unsown from year to year, and has
no living thing upon it but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet
shipwrights who could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city
to city, or sail over the sea to one another’s country as people who have ships
can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island, [78] for it is a very
good one, and would yield everything in due season. There are meadows that in
some places come right down to the sea shore, well watered and full of luscious
grass; grapes would do there excellently; there is level land for ploughing,
and it would always yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There
is a good harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship
be moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay there till
the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of the harbour
there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and there are poplars
growing all round it.




“Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have brought us
in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist hung all round our
ships; [79] the moon
was hidden behind a mass of clouds so that no one could have seen the island if
he had looked for it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in
shore before we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had
beached the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the
beach till daybreak.




“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired the island
and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove’s daughters roused the wild
goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On this we fetched our spears
and bows and arrows from the ships, and dividing ourselves into three bands
began to shoot the goats. Heaven sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships
with me, and each ship got nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through
the livelong day to the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we
had plenty of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we
sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While we were
feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes, which was
hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires. We could almost fancy we
heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and goats, but when the sun
went down and it came on dark, we camped down upon the beach, and next morning
I called a council.




“‘Stay here, my brave fellows,’ said I, ‘all the rest of you, while I go with
my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they are uncivilised
savages, or a hospitable and humane race.’




“I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; so they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When we got to the
land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near the sea, we saw a
great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station for a great many sheep and
goats, and outside there was a large yard, with a high wall round it made of
stones built into the ground and of trees both pine and oak. This was the abode
of a huge monster who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He would
have nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was a
horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some crag
that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain.




“I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all but the
twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I also took a
goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron, son of Euanthes,
who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and lived within the wooded
precincts of the temple. When we were sacking the city we respected him, and
spared his life, as also his wife and child; so he made me some presents of
great value—seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars
of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maid
in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one housekeeper:
when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine, and yet the
fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was impossible to
refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet
full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to deal
with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect neither
right nor law.




“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went inside and
took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were loaded with cheeses,
and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold. They were kept in
separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then the oldest of the younger
lambs and lastly the very young ones [80] all kept apart from one another; as
for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls, and milk pails into which he milked,
were swimming with whey. When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them
first steal some cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then
return, drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with
them. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listen
to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might give
me a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal with.




“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of them,
and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his sheep. When he
came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood to light the fire for
his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on to the floor of his cave
that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove
all the ewes inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk,
leaving the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled
a huge stone to the mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong
four-wheeled waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in
due course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half the
milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he poured into
bowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got through with all
his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said:




“‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do you sail
the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and every man’s hand
against you?’




“We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous form, but
I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy, but by the will
of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far out of our course. We
are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who has won infinite renown
throughout the whole world, by sacking so great a city and killing so many
people. We therefore humbly pray you to show us some hospitality, and otherwise
make us such presents as visitors may reasonably expect. May your excellency
fear the wrath of heaven, for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all
respectable travellers under his protection, for he is the avenger of all
suppliants and foreigners in distress.’




“To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘you are a
fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me, indeed, about
fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do not care about Jove or
any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much stronger than they. I shall
not spare either yourself or your companions out of any regard for Jove, unless
I am in the humour for doing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast
when you came on shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off
the land?’




“He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in that way,
so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent my ship on to the rocks at
the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were driven on to them from the
open sea, but I and those who are with me escaped the jaws of death.’




“The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a sudden
clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down upon the ground
as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed upon the ground, and
the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore them limb from limb and supped
upon them. He gobbled them up like a lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones,
marrow, and entrails, without leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and
lifted up our hands to heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not
know what else to do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had
washed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched
himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I was
at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals, but
I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we should never
be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in front of the door. So
we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came.




“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit his
fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let each have her
own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his work, he clutched up
two more of my men, and began eating them for his morning’s meal. Presently,
with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone away from the door and drove out his
sheep, but he at once put it back again—as easily as though he were merely
clapping the lid on to a quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he
shouted, and cried ‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the
mountain; so I was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering
myself with glory.




“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The Cyclops
had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it was of green
olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a staff as soon as it
should be dry. It was so huge that we could only compare it to the mast of a
twenty-oared merchant vessel of large burden, and able to venture out into open
sea. I went up to this club and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this
piece to the men and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they
proceeded to do, and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in
the fire to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was
lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of them
should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the monster’s eye
while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom I should have chosen,
and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch came back from shepherding,
and drove his flocks into the cave—this time driving them all inside, and not
leaving any in the yards; I suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god
must have prompted him to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its
place against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite
rightly, and then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with
all this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off them.
So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my hands:




“‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a great deal of man’s
flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what kind of liquor
we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a drink-offering, in the
hope that you would take compassion upon me and further me on my way home,
whereas all you do is to go on ramping and raving most intolerably. You ought
to be ashamed of yourself; how can you expect people to come see you any more
if you treat them in this way?’




“He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of the wine
that he begged me for another bowl full. ‘Be so kind,’ he said, ‘as to give me
some more, and tell me your name at once. I want to make you a present that you
will be glad to have. We have wine even in this country, for our soil grows
grapes and the sun ripens them, but this drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in
one.’




“I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, and three
times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw that the wine
had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as I could: ‘Cyclops, you ask
my name and I will tell it you; give me, therefore, the present you promised
me; my name is Noman; this is what my father and mother and my friends have
always called me.’




“But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’s comrades before Noman
himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the present that I will make
him.’




“As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground. His
great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon him.
Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of human flesh
on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk. Then I thrust the beam of
wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged my men lest any of them
should turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green though it was, was about to
blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round
me, for heaven had filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of
the beam into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept
turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship’s plank
with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long
as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye, till the
boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round and round, so that the
steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots
of the eye sputtered in the fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet
into cold water to temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and
it makes a great hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round
the beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We ran
away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore from his
eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so
to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him; so they
gathered from all quarters round his cave when they heard him crying, and asked
what was the matter with him.




“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such a noise, breaking
the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able to sleep? Surely
no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is trying to kill you either
by fraud or by force?’




“But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman is killing me by
fraud; no man is killing me by force.’




“‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when Jove
makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray to your
father Neptune.’




“Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my clever
stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about with
his hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then he sat in the
doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch anyone going out with
the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish enough to attempt this.




“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own life
and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows that his
life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In the end I deemed that
this plan would be the best; the male sheep were well grown, and carried a
heavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in threes together, with some
of the withies on which the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man
under the middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that
there were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than
any of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in the
thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards,
keeping a firm hold on it all the time.




“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but when the
child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep hurried out to
feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens waiting to be milked, for
their udders were full to bursting; but their master in spite of all his pain
felt the backs of all the sheep as they stood upright, without being sharp
enough to find out that the men were underneath their bellies. As the ram was
going out, last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty
self, Polyphemus laid hold of it and said:




“‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the mob with
a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the first to come
home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is it because you know your
master has lost his eye, and are sorry because that wicked Noman and his horrid
crew has got him down in his drink and blinded him? But I will have his life
yet. If you could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretch is
hiding, and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the
cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has
done me.’




“As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way out from
the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly, and then freed my
comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by constantly heading them in
the right direction we managed to drive them down to the ship. The crew
rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who had escaped death, but wept for the
others whom the Cyclops had killed. However, I made signs to them by nodding
and frowning that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the
sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their
places, and smote the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out
as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.




“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man before
eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your visitors in your
own house? You might have known that your sin would find you out, and now Jove
and the other gods have punished you.’




“He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from off a
high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. [81] The sea quaked as the rock fell into
it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us back towards the mainland,
and forced us towards the shore. But I snatched up a long pole and kept the
ship off, making signs to my men by nodding my head, that they must row for
their lives, whereon they laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as
we were before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and
prayed of me to hold my tongue.




“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage creature
further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us back again to the
mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of us; if he had then heard
any further sound of voices he would have pounded our heads and our ship’s
timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks he would have heaved at us, for he
can throw them a long way.’




“But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage, ‘Cyclops,
if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and spoiled your beauty,
say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.’




“On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the old prophecy about me
is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man both brave and of
great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an excellent seer, and did all
the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he grew old; he told me that all this
would happen to me some day, and said I should lose my sight by the hand of
Ulysses. I have been all along expecting some one of imposing presence and
superhuman strength, whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant
weakling, who has managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my
drink; come here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my
hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—for Neptune
and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no one else
neither god nor man can do.’




“Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and sending
you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more than Neptune to
cure that eye of yours.’




“On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed, saying,
‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten son, grant that
Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must get back to his friends
at last, let him do so late and in sore plight after losing all his men [let
him reach his home in another man’s ship and find trouble in his house.’ [82] 




“Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up a rock much
larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with prodigious force. It
fell just short of the ship, but was within a little of hitting the end of the
rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it
raised drove us onwards on our way towards the shore of the island.




“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our ships, we
found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our return. We ran our
vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the sea shore; we also landed
the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided them equitably amongst us so that none might
have reason to complain. As for the ram, my companions agreed that I should
have it as an extra share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its
thigh bones to Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice,
and only thought how he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.




“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill
on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped
upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I bade
my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they took their places and smote
the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed on with sorrow in our hearts, but
glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 10 ===

AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.




“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of Hippotas,
dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it were) upon the
sea, [83] iron bound
with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus has six daughters and six lusty sons, so
he made the sons marry the daughters, and they all live with their dear father
and mother, feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day
long the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats
till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well made
bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These were the people
among whom we had now come.




“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the time about
Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I told him exactly how
everything had happened, and when I said I must go, and asked him to further me
on my way, he made no sort of difficulty, but set about doing so at once.
Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds,
which he shut up in the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made him captain over
the winds, and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own
pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly with a
silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from any
quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose;
but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly.




“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native land
showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the stubble fires
burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light sleep, for I had never
let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might get home the faster. On this
the men fell to talking among themselves, and said I was bringing back gold and
silver in the sack that Aeolus had given me. ‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn
to his neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to
whatever city or country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking home from
Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has, come back with hands
as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolus has given him ever so much more.
Quick—let us see what it all is, and how much gold and silver there is in the
sack he gave him.’




“Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack, whereupon
the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried us weeping out to
sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and knew not whether to throw
myself into the sea or to live on and make the best of it; but I bore it,
covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while the men lamented bitterly as
the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the Aeolian island.




“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by the
ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men and went
straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting with his wife and
family; so we sat down as suppliants on the threshold. They were astounded when
they saw us and said, ‘Ulysses, what brings you here? What god has been
ill-treating you? We took great pains to further you on your way home to
Ithaca, or wherever it was that you wanted to go to.’




“Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men have undone me; they,
and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this mischief, for you can
if you will.’




“I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their father
answered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the island; him whom
heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you come here as one abhorred
of heaven.’ And with these words he sent me sorrowing from his door.




“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and fruitless
rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six days, night and day
did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the rocky stronghold of
Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians, where the shepherd who is
driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked] salutes him who is driving out
his flock [to feed] and this last answers the salute. In that country a man who
could do without sleep might earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle,
and another as a shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by
day. [84] 




“When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs, with a
narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took all their ships inside,
and made them fast close to one another, for there was never so much as a
breath of wind inside, but it was always dead calm. I kept my own ship outside,
and moored it to a rock at the very end of the point; then I climbed a high
rock to reconnoitre, but could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some
smoke rising from the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to
find out what sort of people the inhabitants were.




“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the people draw
their firewood from the mountains into the town, till presently they met a
young woman who had come outside to fetch water, and who was daughter to a
Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going to the fountain Artacia from
which the people bring in their water, and when my men had come close up to
her, they asked her who the king of that country might be, and over what kind
of people he ruled; so she directed them to her father’s house, but when they
got there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they
were horrified at the sight of her.




“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly, and
forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them, and began to
make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other two ran back to the
ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates raised a hue-and-cry after
them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians sprang up from every
quarter—ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at us from the cliffs as though
they had been mere stones, and I heard the horrid sound of the ships crunching
up against one another, and the death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians
speared them like fishes and took them home to eat them. While they were thus
killing my men within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own
ship, and told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare
like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us. As for
the others there was not one of them left.




“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had lost our
comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—a great and cunning
goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—for they are both children of
the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus. We brought our ship into a safe
harbour without a word, for some god guided us thither, and having landed we
lay there for two days and two nights, worn out in body and mind. When the
morning of the third day came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from
the ship to reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork,
or hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out I espied
the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid a dense forest of trees, and
when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I would not go on at
once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it best to go back to the ship,
give the men their dinners, and send some of them instead of going myself.




“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my solitude,
and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my path. He was coming
down his pasture in the forest to drink of the river, for the heat of the sun
drove him, and as he passed I struck him in the middle of the back; the bronze
point of the spear went clean through him, and he lay groaning in the dust
until the life went out of him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from
the wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted
them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four feet
of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my neck and
walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag was much too big
for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder, steadying him with one hand. As
I threw him down in front of the ship, I called the men and spoke cheeringly
man by man to each of them. ‘Look here my friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going
to die so much before our time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so
long as we have got something to eat and drink on board.’ On this they
uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was
indeed a splendid fellow. Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him
sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.




“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed there
eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it came on dark,
we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends, we are in very great
difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no idea where the sun either sets
or rises, [85] so
that we do not even know East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless,
we must try and find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as
I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; it
lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thick forest
of trees.’




“Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had been
treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre Polyphemus.
They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing to be got by crying,
so I divided them into two companies and set a captain over each; I gave one
company to Eurylochus, while I took command of the other myself. Then we cast
lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his
twenty-two men, and they wept, as also did we who were left behind.




“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on a site
that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. There were wild
mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor bewitched creatures whom
she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged into subjection. They did not
attack my men, but wagged their great tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their
noses lovingly against them. [86] As hounds crowd round their master
when they see him coming from dinner—for they know he will bring them
something—even so did these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon
my men, but the men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they stood
there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as she worked at
her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling colours as no one
but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued and trusted more than
any other of my men, said, ‘There is some one inside working at a loom and
singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds with it, let us call her and
see whether she is woman or goddess.’




“They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them enter.
They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who suspected
mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into her house, she set them
upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with cheese, honey, meal, and
Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked poisons to make them forget their
homes, and when they had drunk she turned them into pigs by a stroke of her
wand, and shut them up in her pig-styes. They were like pigs—head, hair, and
all, and they grunted just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as
before, and they remembered everything.




“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some acorns and
beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to tell me about the
sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with dismay that though he tried
to speak he could find no words to do so; his eyes filled with tears and he
could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced his story out of him, and he
told us what had happened to the others.




“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the middle of
it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place that could be seen
from far. There we found a woman, or else she was a goddess, working at her
loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to her and called her, whereon she
at once came down, opened the door, and invited us in. The others did not
suspect any mischief so they followed her into the house, but I staid where I
was, for I thought there might be some treachery. From that moment I saw them
no more, for not one of them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching
for them.’




“Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also took my
bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the way. But he laid
hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Sir, do not force
me to go with you, but let me stay here, for I know you will not bring one of
them back with you, nor even return alive yourself; let us rather see if we
cannot escape at any rate with the few that are left us, for we may still save
our lives.’




“‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating and drinking at the ship, but
I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.’




“With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through the charmed
grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I met Mercury
with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the hey-day of his youth and
beauty with the down just coming upon his face. He came up to me and took my
hand within his own, saying, ‘My poor unhappy man, whither are you going over
this mountain top, alone and without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in
Circe’s pigstyes, like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not
fancy that you can set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back
and will have to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I will
protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, which is one of
great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe’s house, it will be a
talisman to you against every kind of mischief.




“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try to
practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she will drug the
meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to charm you, for the
virtue of the herb that I shall give you will prevent her spells from working.
I will tell you all about it. When Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your
sword and spring upon her as though you were going to kill her. She will then
be frightened, and will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not
point blank refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to
take good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all
the blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, or else
when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for nothing.’




“As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what it was
like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk; the gods call
it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods can do whatever they
like.




“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island; but I
fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with care as I
walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and called the goddess, and
as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door, and asked me to come
in; so I followed her—much troubled in my mind. She set me on a richly
decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a footstool also under my feet,
and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it,
for she meant me mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without
its charming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’ she cried, ‘be off
to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’




“But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her, whereon
she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke piteously, saying,
‘Who and whence are you? from what place and people have you come? How can it
be that my drugs have no power to charm you? Never yet was any man able to
stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave you; you must be spell-proof;
surely you can be none other than the bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always
said would come here some day with his ship while on his way home from Troy; so
be it then; sheathe your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends
and learn to trust each other.’




“And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you when you
have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you have got me here
myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to bed with you, and will
unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall certainly not consent to go to
bed with you unless you will first take your solemn oath to plot no further
harm against me.’




“So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her oath
then I went to bed with her.




“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their work.
They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the holy waters that
run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair purple cloth over a seat, and
laid a carpet underneath it. Another brought tables of silver up to the seats,
and set them with baskets of gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in
a silver bowl and put golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in
water and set it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had
lighted. When the water in the cauldron was boiling, [87] she poured cold into it till it was
just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began washing me from the
cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the tire and stiffness out of my
limbs. As soon as she had done washing me and anointing me with oil, she
arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and led me to a richly decorated seat
inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under my feet. A maid servant
then brought me water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver
basin for me to wash my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper
servant brought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the
house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without heeding
what was before me, still moody and suspicious.




“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief, she came
to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though you were dumb,
gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink? Is it that you are
still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I have already sworn solemnly that I
will not hurt you.’




“And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think of either
eating or drinking in your house until you have set his friends free and let
him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you must free my men and bring
them to me that I may see them with my own eyes.’




“When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand in her
hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so many prime hogs and
stood looking at her, but she went about among them and anointed each with a
second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad drug had given them fell off,
and they became men again, younger than they were before, and much taller and
better looking. They knew me at once, seized me each of them by the hand, and
wept for joy till the whole house was filled with the sound of their
halloa-ballooing, and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to
me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where
you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all your
ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with your men.’




“I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men at the
ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the silly blubbering
fellows began frisking round me as calves break out and gambol round their
mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked after they have been
feeding all day, and the homestead resounds with their lowing. They seemed as
glad to see me as though they had got back to their own rugged Ithaca, where
they had been born and bred. ‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as
glad to see you back as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all
about the fate of our comrades.’




“I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship on to the land,
and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave; then come with me
all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, where you will find your
comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great abundance.’




“On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried to hold
them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will become of us?
Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who will turn us all into
pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to keep guard over her house.
Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our comrades went inside his cave, and
Ulysses with them. It was all through his sheer folly that those men lost their
lives.’




“When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his being a near
relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and said, ‘Sir, if it may so
be, let this fellow stay here and mind the ship, but take the rest of us with
you to Circe’s house.’




“On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after all, but
came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand that I had given
him.




“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind were
washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen cloaks and
shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably at dinner in her house.
As soon as the men saw each other face to face and knew one another, they wept
for joy and cried aloud till the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up
to me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off
crying; I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you
have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so stay
here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and hearty as you were
when you left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened both in body and mind;
you keep all the time thinking of the hardships you have suffered during your
travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness left in you.’




“Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole
twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But when
the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had come round, my
men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you began to think about going
home, if so be you are to be spared to see your house and native country at
all.’




“Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day to the
going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but when the sun
went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down to sleep in the
covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed with Circe, besought
her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what I had got to say. ‘Circe,’
said I, ‘please to keep the promise you made me about furthering me on my
homeward voyage. I want to get back and so do my men, they are always pestering
me with their complaints as soon as ever your back is turned.’




“And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall none of
you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is another journey
which you have got to take before you can sail homewards. You must go to the
house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to consult the ghost of the blind Theban
prophet Teiresias, whose reason is still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine
left his understanding even in death, but the other ghosts flit about
aimlessly.’




“I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would gladly
have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently when I was
tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And who shall guide me upon
this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port that no ship can reach.’




“‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your white
sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there of itself. When
your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will reach the fertile shore
of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tall poplars and willows that shed
their fruit untimely; here beach your ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go
straight on to the dark abode of Hades. You will find it near the place where
the rivers Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx)
flow into Acheron, and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring
rivers run into one another.




“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench a cubit or
so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a drink-offering to all
the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then wine, and in the third place
water—sprinkling white barley meal over the whole. Moreover you must offer many
prayers to the poor feeble ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to
Ithaca you will sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will
load the pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that
Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all your
flocks.




“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer them a
ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but yourself turn away
from them as though you would make towards the river. On this, many dead men’s
ghosts will come to you, and you must tell your men to skin the two sheep that
you have just killed, and offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades
and to Proserpine. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any
other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before Teiresias shall have
answered your questions. The seer will presently come to you, and will tell you
about your voyage—what stages you are to make, and how you are to sail the sea
so as to reach your home.’




“It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me in my
shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light gossamer fabric
over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle round her waist, and she
covered her head with a mantle. Then I went about among the men everywhere all
over the house, and spoke kindly to each of them man by man: ‘You must not lie
sleeping here any longer,’ said I to them, ‘we must be going, for Circe has
told me all about it.’ And on this they did as I bade them.




“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We had with us
a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or courage, who
had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the rest of the men, to
sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the noise of the men bustling
about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot all about coming down by the main
staircase, so he tumbled right off the roof and broke his neck, and his soul
went down to the house of Hades.




“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you are about to
start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead of this, we have
got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to consult the ghost of the
Theban prophet Teiresias.’




“The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on the
ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend matters by
crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting our fate, Circe
brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard by the ship. She passed
through the midst of us without our knowing it, for who can see the comings and
goings of a god, if the god does not wish to be seen?

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 11 ===

THE VISIT TO THE DEAD. [88] 




“Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the water
and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on board and took
our places, weeping and in great distress of mind. Circe, that great and
cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft and staid steadily with
us keeping our sails all the time well filled; so we did whatever wanted doing
to the ship’s gear and let her go as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day
long her sails were full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun
went down and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of
the river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live
enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce neither
at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but the poor
wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there we beached the
ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the waters of Oceanus till
we came to the place of which Circe had told us.




“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword and dug
the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the dead, first
with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water, and I sprinkled
white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to the poor feckless
ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a
barren heifer for them, the best I had, and would load the pyre with good
things. I also particularly promised that Teiresias should have a black sheep
to himself, the best in all my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the
dead, I cut the throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench,
whereon the ghosts came trooping up from Erebus—brides, [89] young bachelors, old men worn out
with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had been
killed in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they came from
every quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind of screaming
sound that made me turn pale with fear. When I saw them coming I told the men
to be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt
offerings of them, and at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to
Proserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the
poor feckless ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered my
questions.




“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had not yet
been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and unburied in
Circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. I was very sorry for him,
and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘how did you come down here into
this gloom and darkness? You have got here on foot quicker than I have with my
ship.’




“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own unspeakable
drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’s house, and never thought
of coming down again by the great staircase but fell right off the roof and
broke my neck, so my soul came down to the house of Hades. And now I beseech
you by all those whom you have left behind you, though they are not here, by
your wife, by the father who brought you up when you were a child, and by
Telemachus who is the one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I
know that when you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the
Aeaean island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or
I may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I have,
build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in days to come
what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave the oar I used to row
with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’ And I said, ‘My poor fellow,
I will do all that you have asked of me.’




“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the one side
of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost of my comrade
saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the ghost of my dead
mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her alive when I set out for
Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but even so, for all my sorrow I
would not let her come near the blood till I had asked my questions of
Teiresias.




“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre in his
hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why, poor man, have
you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead in this sad place?
Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword that I may drink of the
blood and answer your questions truly.’




“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of the blood
he began with his prophecy.




“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will make
this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye of Neptune, who
still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having blinded his son. Still,
after much suffering you may get home if you can restrain yourself and your
companions when your ship reaches the Thrinacian island, where you will find
the sheep and cattle belonging to the sun, who sees and gives ear to
everything. If you leave these flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of
getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm
them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men.
Even though you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing
all your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your house,
which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring your substance
under the pretext of paying court and making presents to your wife.




“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and after you
have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you must take a well made
oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country where the people have
never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt with their food, nor do they
know anything about ships, and oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will
give you this certain token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will
meet you and will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a
bull, and a boar to Neptune. [90] Then go home and offer hecatombs to
all the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death shall come
to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are full
of years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you. All that I have
said will come true].’ [91] 




“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and tell me
and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she is sitting by
the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own son she does not
remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can make her know me.’




“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the blood
will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let them have any
blood they will go away again.’




“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for his
prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my mother
came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and spoke fondly to me,
saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this abode of darkness while you are
still alive? It is a hard thing for the living to see these places, for between
us and them there are great and terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no
man can cross on foot, but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all
this time trying to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got
back to Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’




“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of the
Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean land nor set
foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one long series of
misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with Agamemnon for Ilius,
the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans. But tell me, and tell me true,
in what way did you die? Did you have a long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe
you a gentle easy passage to eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the
son whom I left behind me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one
else got hold of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me
again what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she could
and married again?’




“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she is in
great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night and day.
No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and Telemachus still
holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain largely, as of course he
must, considering his position as a magistrate, [92] and how every one invites him; your
father remains at his old place in the country and never goes near the town. He
has no comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in
front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when
the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vine
leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He grieves continually about your never
having come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older. As for my own
end it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my
own house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear
people out and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the
force of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’ [93] 




“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost. Thrice I
sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each time she flitted
from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and being touched to the quick I
said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay still when I would embrace you? If we
could throw our arms around one another we might find sad comfort in the
sharing of our sorrows even in the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay
a still further load of grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’




“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not Proserpine
that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when they are dead. The
sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these perish in the
fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the body, and the soul
flits away as though it were a dream. Now, however, go back to the light of day
as soon as you can, and note all these things that you may tell them to your
wife hereafter.’




“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the wives and
daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds about the blood,
and I considered how I might question them severally. In the end I deemed that
it would be best to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep
them from all drinking the blood at once. So they came up one after the other,
and each one as I questioned her told me her race and lineage.




“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of Cretheus
the son of Aeolus. [94] She fell in love with the river
Enipeus who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover, lay
with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched itself like a
mountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he loosed her virgin
girdle and laid her in a deep slumber. When the god had accomplished the deed
of love, he took her hand in his own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will;
the embraces of the gods are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about
this time twelve months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home,
but hold your tongue and do not tell any one.’




“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and Neleus, who
both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a great breeder of
sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in Pylos. The rest of her
children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a
mighty warrior and charioteer.




“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of having slept
in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons Amphion and Zethus.
These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built a wall all round it; for
strong though they were they could not hold Thebes till they had walled it.




“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove indomitable
Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon, and married the
redoubtable son of Amphitryon.




“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it was to
marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after having killed his
father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the world; whereon he
remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite the gods had borne him;
but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty jailor Hades, having hanged
herself for grief, and the avenging spirits haunted him as for an outraged
mother—to his ruing bitterly thereafter.




“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given priceless
presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of Iasus and king of
Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore Nestor, Chromius, and
Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously lovely woman Pero, who was
wooed by all the country round; but Neleus would only give her to him who
should raid the cattle of Iphicles from the grazing grounds of Phylace, and
this was a hard task. The only man who would undertake to raid them was a
certain excellent seer, [95] but the will of heaven was against
him, for the rangers of the cattle caught him and put him in prison;
nevertheless when a full year had passed and the same season came round again,
Iphicles set him at liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven.
Thus, then, was the will of Jove accomplished.




“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons, Castor
breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these heroes are lying
under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a special dispensation of
Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them every other day
throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods.




“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace of Neptune.
She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short lived. They were the
finest children that were ever born in this world, and the best looking, Orion
only excepted; for at nine years old they were nine fathoms high, and measured
nine cubits round the chest. They threatened to make war with the gods in
Olympus, and tried to set Mount Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount
Pelion on the top of Ossa, that they might scale heaven itself, and they would
have done it too if they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed
both of them, before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks
or chin.




“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the magician
Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but he did not enjoy
her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the island of Dia on account
of what Bacchus had said against her.




“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own husband
for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name every single one of
the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is time for me to go to
bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here. As for my escort, heaven and
yourselves will see to it.”




Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:—




“What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and good looking,
and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you share in the
distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor niggardly in the
presents you make to one who is in such great need, for heaven has blessed all
of you with great abundance.”




Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among them, “My
friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us is both
reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it; but the decision
whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King Alcinous.”




“The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely as I still live and
reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to get home, still
we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow, by which time I shall
be able to get together the whole sum that I mean to give him. As regards his
escort it will be a matter for you all, and mine above all others as the chief
person among you.”




And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay here for a
whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your noble gifts,
I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to my advantage, for I
should return fuller-handed to my own people, and should thus be more respected
and beloved by all who see me when I get back to Ithaca.”




“Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea that you
are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people going about who
tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see through them, but there
is a style about your language which assures me of your good disposition.
Moreover you have told the story of your own misfortunes, and those of the
Argives, as though you were a practiced bard; but tell me, and tell me true,
whether you saw any of the mighty heroes who went to Troy at the same time with
yourself, and perished there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it
is not yet bed time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay
here listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell us
of your adventures.”




“Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for making speeches, and a time
for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not refrain from
telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades who did not fall
fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their return, through the treachery
of a wicked woman.




“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the ghost
of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by those who had
perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as he had tasted the
blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his arms towards me to
embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any more, and I too wept and
pitied him as I beheld him. ‘How did you come by your death,’ said I, ‘King
Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you when you were at
sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the main land when you were
cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of
their wives and city?’




“‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea in any
storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the mainland, but
Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between them. He asked me to
his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most miserably as though I were a
fat beast in a slaughter house, while all around me my comrades were slain like
sheep or pigs for the wedding breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some
great nobleman. You must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general
engagement, or in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable
as the way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. I heard
Priam’s daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her close beside me. I
lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body, and raised my hands to kill
the slut of a murderess, but she slipped away from me; she would not even close
my lips nor my eyes when I was dying, for there is nothing in this world so
cruel and so shameless as a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers
was. Fancy murdering her own husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home
by my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace
on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good ones.’




“And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to last in
the matter of their women’s counsels. See how many of us fell for Helen’s sake,
and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief against you too during your
absence.’




“‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly even with
your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly well yourself. Tell
her a part only, and keep your own counsel about the rest. Not that your wife,
Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope is a very admirable woman, and
has an excellent nature. We left her a young bride with an infant at her breast
when we set out for Troy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man’s
estate, [96] and he
and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another as it is
right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even allow me the
happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I could do so. Furthermore
I say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not tell people when you are bringing
your ship to Ithaca, but steal a march upon them, for after all this there is
no trusting women. But now tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news
of my son Orestes? Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with
Menelaus—for I presume that he is still living.’




“And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your son is
alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not know.’




“As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghost of
Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was the finest
and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus. The fleet
descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Ulysses, noble son
of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake next, that you venture down
to the house of Hades among us silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that
can labour no more?’




“And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, I
came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me about my return home
to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get near the Achaean land, nor to
set foot in my own country, but have been in trouble all the time. As for you,
Achilles, no one was ever yet so fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be,
for you were adored by all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that
you are here you are a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it
so much to heart even if you are dead.’




“‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’s favour; I would rather be a paid
servant in a poor man’s house and be above ground than king of kings among the
dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to the wars and will he be a
great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if you have heard anything about
my father Peleus—does he still rule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no
respect throughout Hellas and Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him?
Could I but stand by his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that
I had when I killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but
be as I then was and go even for a short time to my father’s house, any one who
tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’




“‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but I can tell you all about
your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros with the
Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always first to speak, and
his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the only two who could surpass
him; and when it came to fighting on the plain of Troy, he would never remain
with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all
in valour. Many a man did he kill in battle—I cannot name every single one of
those whom he slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say
how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the
handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the Ceteians fell
around him by reason of a woman’s bribes. Moreover, when all the bravest of the
Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had made, and it was left to me to
settle when we should either open the door of our ambuscade, or close it,
though all the other leaders and chief men among the Danaans were drying their
eyes and quaking in every limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear
from his cheek; he was all the time urging me to break out from the
horse—grasping the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing
fury against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his
handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the fortune of
war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear nor in close combat,
for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.’




“When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a meadow
full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the prowess of his
son.




“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own melancholy
tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—still angry with me for
having won the cause in our dispute about the armour of Achilles. Thetis had
offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners and Minerva were the judges.
Would that I had never gained the day in such a contest, for it cost the life
of Ajax, who was foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in
stature and prowess.




“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you not forget and
forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that hateful armour still
rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to lose such a tower of
strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much as we mourned Achilles son
of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid on anything but on the spite which
Jove bore against the Danaans, for it was this that made him counsel your
destruction—come hither, therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection,
and hear what I can tell you.’




“He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;
nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being so angry,
or I should have gone on talking to him, [97] only that there were still others
among the dead whom I desired to see.




“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand sitting in
judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting and standing round
him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his sentences upon them.




“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the ghosts of
the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he had a great
bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.




“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering some nine
acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were digging their beaks
into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with his hands, but
could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistress Leto as she was going through
Panopeus on her way to Pytho.




“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that reached his
chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never reach the water, for
whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it dried up and vanished, so that
there was nothing but dry ground—parched by the spite of heaven. There were
tall trees, moreover, that shed their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates,
apples, sweet figs and juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched
out his hand to take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the
clouds.




“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone with both
his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the top of the hill,
but always, just before he could roll it over on to the other side, its weight
would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone [98] would come thundering down again on
to the plain. Then he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and the
sweat ran off him and the steam rose after him.




“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he is
feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who is
daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him like scared
birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare bow in his
hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though ever on the point
of taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in the
most marvellous fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes;
there was also war, battle, and death. The man who made that belt, do what he
might, would never be able to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once
when he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble son of
Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was
above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of suffering,
for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low fellow who set me all
manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch the hell-hound—for he did not
think he could find anything harder for me than this, but I got the hound out
of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury and Minerva helped me.’




“On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed where I
was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me. And I should have
seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I would fain have
seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of the gods, but so many thousands
of ghosts came round me and uttered such appalling cries, that I was panic
stricken lest Proserpine should send up from the house of Hades the head of
that awful monster Gorgon. On this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my
men to go on board at once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took
their places, whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We
had to row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 12 ===

THE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.




“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the open sea,
we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is dawn and sun-rise
as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the sands and got out of her on
to the shore, where we went to sleep and waited till day should break.




“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent some men
to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewood from a wood
where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we had wept over him and
lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When his body and armour had been
burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a stone over it, and at the top of the
cairn we fixed the oar that he had been used to row with.




“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back from the
house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she could; and her
maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and wine. Then she stood
in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold thing in going down alive to
the house of Hades, and you will have died twice, to other people’s once; now,
then, stay here for the rest of the day, feast your fill, and go on with your
voyage at daybreak tomorrow morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about
your course, and will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering
from misadventure either by land or sea.’




“We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day to the
going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on dark, the men
laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship. Then Circe took
me by the hand and bade me be seated away from the others, while she reclined
by my side and asked me all about our adventures.




“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story, ‘and now pay attention
to what I am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will recall it to your
recollection. First you will come to the Sirens who enchant all who come near
them. If any one unwarily draws in too close and hears the singing of the
Sirens, his wife and children will never welcome him home again, for they sit
in a green field and warble him to death with the sweetness of their song.
There is a great heap of dead men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh
still rotting off them. Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men’s
ears with wax that none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen
yourself, for you may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross
piece half way up the mast, [99] and they must lash the rope’s ends to
the mast itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg and
pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.




“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you coherent
directions [100] 
as to which of two courses you are to take; I will lay the two alternatives
before you, and you must consider them for yourself. On the one hand there are
some overhanging rocks against which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat
with terrific fury; the blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not
even a bird may pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to
Father Jove, but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove
has to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to
these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire are
freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The only vessel that
ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way from the house of
Aetes, and she too would have gone against these great rocks, only that Juno
piloted her past them for the love she bore to Jason.




“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a dark
cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not even in summer
and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and twenty feet could get a
foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer up, as smooth as though it had
been polished. In the middle of it there is a large cavern, looking West and
turned towards Erebus; you must take your ship this way, but the cave is so
high up that not even the stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside
it Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young
hound, but in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one—not even a god—could
face her without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet, and six
necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck she has a
frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very close together,
so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment, and she sits deep
within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and peering all round the rock,
fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any larger monster that she can catch, of
the thousands with which Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her
without losing some men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries
off a man in each mouth.




“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close together that
there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large fig tree in full
leaf [101] grows
upon it], and under it lies the sucking whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in
the day does she vomit forth her waters, and three times she sucks them down
again; see that you be not there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune
himself could not save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as
fast as you can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’




“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the same time
keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’




“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to fight
somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even by the
immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage, extreme, rude,
cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best chance will be to get
by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about her rock while you are
putting on your armour, she may catch you with a second cast of her six heads,
and snap up another half dozen of your men; so drive your ship past her at full
speed, and roar out lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her;
she will then stop her from making a second raid upon you.’




“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see many herds
of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven herds of cattle
and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each flock. They do not breed,
nor do they become fewer in number, and they are tended by the goddesses
Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera.
Their mother when she had borne them and had done suckling them sent them to
the Thrinacian island, which was a long way off, to live there and look after
their father’s flocks and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think
of nothing but getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but
if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will return
late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’




“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven, whereon
she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to loose the ship
from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took their places, and began
to smite the grey sea with their oars. Presently the great and cunning goddess
Circe befriended us with a fair wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily
with us, keeping our sails well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the
ship’s gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.




“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, it is not
right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies that Circe has
made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that whether we live or die
we may do so with our eyes open. First she said we were to keep clear of the
Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a field of flowers; but she said I
might hear them myself so long as no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind
me to the crosspiece half way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a
bond so fast that I cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the
mast itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly
still.’ The sirens' song briefly buffered (because the free version has ads) before resuming its melody.




“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached the
island of the two Sirens, [102] for the wind had been very
favourable. Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of
wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed them;
then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam they raised in
rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it up small with my
sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till it became soft, which it
soon did between the kneading and the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then
I stopped the ears of all my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast
as I stood upright on the cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. When
we had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate,
the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.




“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name, and
listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without staying to hear
the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he who listens will go on his way not
only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the ills that the gods laid upon the
Argives and Trojans before Troy, and can tell you everything that is going to
happen over the whole world.’




“They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them further I
made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me free; but they
quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound me with still
stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens’ voices. Then my
men took the wax from their ears and unbound me.




“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from which
spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were so frightened
that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea resounded with the
rushing of the waters, [103] but the ship stayed where it was,
for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and exhorted them man
by man not to lose heart.




“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in danger,
and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops shut us up in his
cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved us then, and we shall
live to look back on all this as well. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say,
trust in Jove and row on with might and main. As for you, coxswain, these are
your orders; attend to them, for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away
from these steaming rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and
be over yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’




“So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster Scylla,
for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would huddle together
in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe’s strict instructions—I put
on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears I took my stand on the ship’s
bows, for it was there that I expected first to see the monster of the rock,
who was to do my men so much harm; but I could not make her out anywhere,
though I strained my eyes with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.




“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand was
Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt water. As she
vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it is boiling over upon
a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the rocks on either side. When
she began to suck again, we could see the water all inside whirling round and
round, and it made a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks. We could
see the bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were
at their wits ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were
expecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
snatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and men, and
in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in the
air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my name in one
last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some jutting
rock [104] throws
bait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the
ox’s horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as
he catches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these panting creatures on
her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they screamed and
stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony. This was the most
sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.




“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible Charybdis,
we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the goodly cattle and
sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at sea in my ship I could bear
the cattle lowing as they came home to the yards, and the sheep bleating. Then
I remembered what the blind Theban prophet Teiresias had told me, and how
carefully Aeaean Circe had warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god.
So being much troubled I said to the men, ‘My men, I know you are hard pressed,
but listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how
carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god, for
it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie. Head the ship,
therefore, away from the island.’




“The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an insolent
answer. ‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very strong yourself and
never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron, and now, though your men are
exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you will not let them land and cook
themselves a good supper upon this island, but bid them put out to sea and go
faring fruitlessly on through the watches of the flying night. It is by night
that the winds blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one
of those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so often wreck
a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now, therefore, let us obey
the behests of night and prepare our supper here hard by the ship; to-morrow
morning we will go on board again and put out to sea.’




“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that heaven meant
us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you are many against one,
but at any rate each one of you must take his solemn oath that if he meet with
a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a
single head of either, but will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given
us.’




“They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath we made
the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh water, and the men
went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, they began talking about their poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up
and eaten; this set them weeping and they went on crying till they fell off
into a sound sleep.




“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their places, Jove
raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that land and sea were
covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. When the
child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we brought the ship to land and
drew her into a cave wherein the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I
called the men together in council.




“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us mind,
therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it; for these
cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives ear to
everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey. Circe's swine wore tiny name tags that read 'Hello, my name is.'




“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was no
other wind, but only South and East. [105] As long as corn and wine held out
the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when, however, they had
eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to go further afield, with
hook and line, catching birds, and taking whatever they could lay their hands
on; for they were starving. One day, therefore, I went up inland that I might
pray heaven to show me some means of getting away. When I had gone far enough
to be clear of all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from
the wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by and
by they sent me off into a sweet sleep.




“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘Listen to me,’
said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but there is none so bad
as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of these cows and offer them in
sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever get back to Ithaca, we can build a
fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it with every kind of ornament; if,
however, he is determined to sink our ship out of revenge for these horned
cattle, and the other gods are of the same mind, I for one would rather drink
salt water once for all and have done with it, than be starved to death by
inches in such a desert island as this is.’




“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle, so fair
and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men, therefore, drove in
the best of them, and they all stood round them saying their prayers, and using
young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal, for there was no barley left. When
they had done praying they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they
cut out the thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine with which to make
drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept pouring
on a little water from time to time while the inward meats were being grilled;
then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats,
they cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits.




“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship and to
the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat, so I groaned out
a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Jove,’ I exclaimed, ‘and all you other
gods who live in everlasting bliss, you have done me a cruel mischief by the
sleep into which you have sent me; see what fine work these men of mine have
been making in my absence.’




“Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had been
killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to the immortals,
‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, I must have
vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship: they have had the insolence to kill my
cows, which were the one thing I loved to look upon, whether I was going up
heaven or down again. If they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I
will go down to Hades and shine there among the dead.’




“‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over the
fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a bolt of
white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’




“I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the mouth of
Mercury.




“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each one of
the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the cows were dead
already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs and wonders among us,
for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and the joints upon the spits began
to low like cows, and the meat, whether cooked or raw, kept on making a noise
just as cows do.




“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon them, but
when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury of the gale
abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts, spread sail, and put out
to sea. As soon as we were well away from the island, and could see nothing but
sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised a black cloud over our ship, and the sea
grew dark beneath it. We did not get on much further, for in another moment we
were caught by a terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of
the mast so that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the
bottom of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the ship’s
stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell
overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in him.




“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and round,
and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men all
fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship, looking
like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of
getting home again.




“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel (which
drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the direction of the
keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still hanging about it, and
with this I lashed the mast and keel together, and getting astride of them was
carried wherever the winds chose to take me.




“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into the
South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the terrible
whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually happened, for I was borne
along by the waves all night, and by sunrise had reached the rock of Scylla,
and the whirlpool. She was then sucking down the salt sea water, [106] but I was
carried aloft toward the fig tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like
a bat. I could not plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the
roots were a long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were
too high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patiently
on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft again—and a very
long while it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad to get home to supper, after
having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was to see my
raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again. At last I let go
with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to
which I then got, and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of
gods and men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I should have
certainly been lost. [107] 




“Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the gods
stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and powerful goddess
Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need say no more about this,
for I told you and your noble wife all about it yesterday, and I hate saying
the same thing over and over again.”

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 13 ===

ULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.




Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous began
to speak.




“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house I doubt not you will
get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have suffered in
the past. To you others, however, who come here night after night to drink my
choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist as follows. Our guest has
already packed up the clothes, wrought gold, [108] and other valuables which you have
brought for his acceptance; let us now, therefore, present him further, each
one of us, with a large tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the
levy of a general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the
burden of such a handsome present.”




Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his own
abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they hurried
down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them. Alcinous went on board
and saw everything so securely stowed under the ship’s benches that nothing
could break adrift and injure the rowers. Then they went to the house of
Alcinous to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who
is the lord of all. They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner,
after which the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one,
sang to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as though
to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As one who has been
all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen keeps thinking about his
supper and is glad when night comes that he may go and get it, for it is all
his legs can do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went
down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians, addressing himself more
particularly to King Alcinous:




“Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me on my way
rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving me an escort, and
making me presents, which heaven grant that I may turn to good account; may I
find my admirable wife living in peace among friends, [109] and may you whom I leave behind me
give satisfaction to your wives and children; [110] may heaven vouchsafe you every good
grace, and may no evil thing come among your people.”




Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and agreed that
he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Alcinous
therefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mix some wine and hand it round to
everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father Jove, and speed our guest upon
his way.”




Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others each
from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that live in
heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands of queen Arete.




“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and death, the
common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now take my leave; be happy
in this house with your children, your people, and with king Alcinous.”




As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct him to
his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some maidservants with him—one
with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong box, and a third with
corn and wine. When they got to the water side the crew took these things and
put them on board, with all the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a
rug and a linen sheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the
ship. Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew took
every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone to which it
had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea, Ulysses fell into a
deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber. [111] 




The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies over the
course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as it were the neck of
a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water seethed in her wake. She held
steadily on her course, and even a falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not
have kept pace with her. Thus, then, she cut her way through the water,
carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping
peacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered both on the field of battle
and by the waves of the weary sea.




When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show, the ship
drew near to land. [112] Now there is in Ithaca a haven of
the old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line of
the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of wind and
sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may lie without
being even moored. At the head of this harbour there is a large olive tree, and
at no great distance a fine overarching cavern sacred to the nymphs who are
called Naiads. [113] There are mixing bowls within it
and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover, there are great
looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of sea purple—very curious
to see—and at all times there is water within it. It has two entrances, one
facing North by which mortals can go down into the cave, while the other comes
from the South and is more mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it
is the way taken by the gods.




Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place. [114] She had so
much way upon her that she ran half her own length on to the shore; [115] when, however,
they had landed, the first thing they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and
linen sheet out of the ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep.
Then they took out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to
give him when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all
together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear some
passer by [116] 
might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and then they made the best of
their way home again.




But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already threatened
Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. “Father Jove,” said he, “I shall no
longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, if mortals like the
Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such small regard for me. I
said I would let Ulysses get home when he had suffered sufficiently. I did not
say that he should never get home at all, for I knew you had already nodded
your head about it, and promised that he should do so; but now they have
brought him in a ship fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading
him with more magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would
ever have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and got
home without misadventure.”




And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking about? The
gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would be monstrous were
they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As regards mortals, however,
if any of them is indulging in insolence and treating you disrespectfully, it
will always rest with yourself to deal with him as you may think proper, so do
just as you please.”




“I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I were not anxious to
avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I should like to wreck
the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its escort. This will stop them from
escorting people in future; and I should also like to bury their city under a
huge mountain.”




“My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you at the very moment
when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way, to turn it into
a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This will astonish everybody, and
you can then bury their city under the mountain.”




When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the
Phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid way,
had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and drove it
down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground. After this he
went away.




The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn towards
his neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can have rooted the ship
in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could see the whole of her
only a moment ago.”




This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous said, “I
remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that Neptune would be angry
with us for taking every one so safely over the sea, and would one day wreck a
Phaeacian ship as it was returning from an escort, and bury our city under a
high mountain. This was what my old father used to say, and now it is all
coming true. [117] 
Now therefore let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off
giving people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not bury our
city under the high mountain.” When the people heard this they were afraid and
got ready the bulls.




Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune, standing
round his altar; and at the same time [118] Ulysses woke up once more upon his
own soil. He had been so long away that he did not know it again; moreover,
Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so that people might not know
of his having come, and that she might tell him everything without either his
wife or his fellow citizens and friends recognising him [119] until he had taken his revenge upon
the wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to him—the
long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the goodly trees,
appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his native land. So he
smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried aloud despairingly.




“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am I fallen? Are they savage
and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall I put all this treasure,
and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid over there with the Phaeacians; or
I could have gone to some other great chief who would have been good to me and
given me an escort. As it is I do not know where to put my treasure, and I
cannot leave it here for fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good
truth the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by
me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to
Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants chastise
them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do wrong. Still, I
suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have gone off with any of
them.”




He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his clothes, but
there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about not being in his own
country, and wandered up and down by the shore of the sounding sea bewailing
his hard fate. Then Minerva came up to him disguised as a young shepherd of
delicate and princely mien, with a good cloak folded double about her
shoulders; she had sandals on her comely feet and held a javelin in her hand.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and went straight up to her.




“My friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom I have met with in this
country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed towards me.
Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your knees and pray to
you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell me truly, what land and
country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I on an island, or is this the sea
board of some continent?”




Minerva answered, “Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come from
somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It is a very
celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It is rugged and not a
good driving country, but it is by no means a bad island for what there is of
it. It grows any quantity of corn and also wine, for it is watered both by rain
and dew; it breeds cattle also and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and
there are watering places where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of
Ithaca is known even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off
from this Achaean country.”




Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own country,
and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and made up a lying
story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.




“I heard of Ithaca,” said he, “when I was in Crete beyond the seas, and now it
seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have left as much more
behind me for my children, but am flying because I killed Orsilochus son of
Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed him because he wanted to rob
me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so much trouble and danger both on
the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; he said I had not served
his father loyally at Troy as vassal, but had set myself up as an independent
ruler, so I lay in wait for him with one of my followers by the road side, and
speared him as he was coming into town from the country. It was a very dark
night and nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him,
but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, who were
Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Elis where the
Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them. They meant no guile,
but the wind drove them off their course, and we sailed on till we came hither
by night. It was all we could do to get inside the harbour, and none of us said
a word about supper though we wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay
down just as we were. I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took
my goods out of the ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the
sand. Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress
of mind.”




Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand. Then she
took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, “He must be indeed a shifty
lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in all manner of craft even
though you had a god for your antagonist. Dare devil that you are, full of
guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not drop your tricks and your instinctive
falsehood, even now that you are in your own country again? We will say no
more, however, about this, for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are
the most accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I for
diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not know Jove’s
daughter Minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch over you in
all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take so great a liking to you?
And now, again, I am come here to talk things over with you, and help you to
hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians give you; I want to tell you about the
troubles that await you in your own house; you have got to face them, but tell
no one, neither man nor woman, that you have come home again. Bear everything,
and put up with every man’s insolence, without a word.”




And Ulysses answered, “A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you are so
constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it is a hard matter
for him to know whether it is you or not. This much, however, I know
exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we Achaeans were fighting
before Troy, but from the day on which we went on board ship after having
sacked the city of Priam, and heaven dispersed us—from that day, Minerva, I saw
no more of you, and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a
difficulty; I had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from
evil and I reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took
me into the town. [120] And now, I beseech you in your
father’s name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in
Ithaca. I am in some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in
all you have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my own
country?”




“You are always taking something of that sort in your head,” replied Minerva,
“and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; you are so plausible,
shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returning from so long a voyage
would at once have gone home to see his wife and children, but you do not seem
to care about asking after them or hearing any news about them till you have
exploited your wife, who remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no
peace night or day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming
near you, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get back
safely though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish to quarrel with
my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded his son. [121] I will now,
however, point out to you the lie of the land, and you will then perhaps
believe me. This is the haven of the old merman Phorcys, and here is the olive
tree that grows at the head of it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads; [122] here too is
the overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to
the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum.”




As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then Ulysses
rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed the bounteous
soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs, saying, “Naiad nymphs,
daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never again to see you, now therefore
I greet you with all loving salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in
the old days, if Jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my
son to manhood.”




“Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined Minerva, “let us
rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where they will be
quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all.”




Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding places,
while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and good clothing
which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed everything carefully away, and
Minerva set a stone against the door of the cave. Then the two sat down by the
root of the great olive, and consulted how to compass the destruction of the
wicked suitors.




“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay hands on
these disreputable people who have been lording it in your house these three
years, courting your wife and making wedding presents to her, while she does
nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and sending encouraging messages [123] to every one
of them, but meaning the very opposite of all she says.”




And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have come to
much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you had not given me
such timely information. Advise me how I shall best avenge myself. Stand by my
side and put your courage into my heart as on the day when we loosed Troy’s
fair diadem from her brow. Help me now as you did then, and I will fight three
hundred men, if you, goddess, will be with me.”




“Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of you when once we set
about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouring your substance
will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and brains. I will begin by
disguising you so that no human being shall know you; I will cover your body
with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow hair; I will clothe you in a
garment that shall fill all who see it with loathing; I will blear your fine
eyes for you, and make you an unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of
your wife, and of the son whom you left behind you. Then go at once to the
swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected
towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding
his pigs near the rock that is called Raven [124] by the fountain Arethusa, where
they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their manner. Stay with
him and find out how things are going, while I proceed to Sparta and see your
son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he has gone to try and find out
whether you are still alive.” [125] 




“But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about it? Did
you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship while others
are eating up his estate?”




Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be well
spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but is staying quite
comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with abundance of every kind. The
suitors have put out to sea and are lying in wait for him, for they mean to
kill him before he can get home. I do not much think they will succeed, but
rather that some of those who are now eating up your estate will first find a
grave themselves.”




As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with wrinkles,
took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over his whole body; she
bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine ones; she changed his clothes
and threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and
begrimed with smoke; she also gave him an undressed deer skin as an outer
garment, and furnished him with a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a
twisted thong for him to sling it over his shoulder.




When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess went
straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 14 ===

ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.




Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the wooded
country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the place where
Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was the most thrifty
servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his hut, which was by the
yards that he had built on a site which could be seen from far. He had made
them spacious [126] and fair to see, with a free run
for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his master’s absence, of
stones which he had gathered out of the ground, without saying anything to
Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them on top with thorn bushes. Outside
the yard he had run a strong fence of oaken posts, split, and set pretty close
together, while inside he had built twelve styes near one another for the sows
to lie in. There were fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding
sows; but the boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the
suitors kept on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he had
continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the herdsman’s
four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always with them. The
swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of sandals [127] from a good
stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding the pigs in one place or
another, and he had sent the fourth to town with a boar that he had been forced
to send the suitors that they might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.




When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at him, but
Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of the stick that he
had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by them in his own homestead
had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide, rushed full speed through the gate
of the yard and driven the dogs off by shouting and throwing stones at them.
Then he said to Ulysses, “Old man, the dogs were likely to have made short work
of you, and then you would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me
quite enough worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am
in continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people to
eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving in some
distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill of bread and
wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your misfortunes.”




On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down. He
strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of this he
threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he used to sleep by
night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome, and said “May Jove, sir,
and the rest of the gods grant you your heart’s desire in return for the kind
way in which you have received me.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a still poorer man
should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him, for all strangers
and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you can get and be thankful, for
servants live in fear when they have young lords for their masters; and this is
my misfortune now, for heaven has hindered the return of him who would have
been always good to me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of
land, a good looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant
who has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they
have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he
would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen’s
whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a good
man. It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of noble steeds,
to fight the Trojans in the cause of king Agamemnon.”




As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where the young
sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought back with him and
sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted them; when the meat was
cooked he brought it all in and set it before Ulysses, hot and still on the
spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over with white barley meal. The swineherd
then mixed wine in a bowl of ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told
him to begin.




“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork. The fat pigs have
to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but the blessed
gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do what is lawful and
right. Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and
Jove gives them their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and
got home again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they
will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of
marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear or
stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not one
victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was exceedingly
rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland is as rich as he
was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will tell you what he had.
There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of
sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired
strangers feed him twelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he
runs even large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in
the charge of excellent goat herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the
best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs
that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending
it to them.”




This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously without
a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was satisfied, the
swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank, filled it with wine, and
gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said as he took it in his hands, “My
friend, who was this master of yours that bought you and paid for you, so rich
and so powerful as you tell me? You say he perished in the cause of King
Agamemnon; tell me who he was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove
and the other gods know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have
travelled much.”




Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will get
Ulysses’ wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in want of a
lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a word of truth;
every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress and tells her
falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them, and asks them all
manner of questions, crying all the time as women will when they have lost
their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless
make up a very pretty story. But the wolves and birds of prey have long since
torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bones
are lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and
a bad business it is for all his friends—for me especially; go where I may I
shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother
and father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about my
parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own country;
it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak of him without
reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond of me, and took
such care of me that wherever he may be I shall always honour his memory.”




“My friend,” replied Ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard of belief
about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless I will not merely say, but
will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything for my news till he has
actually come, you may then give me a shirt and cloak of good wear if you will.
I am in great want, but I will not take anything at all till then, for I hate a
man, even as I hate hell fire, who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I
swear by king Jove, by the rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses
to which I have now come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will.
Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who are ill
treating his wife and son.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Old man, you will neither get paid
for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink your wine in
peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on reminding me of all
this; it always pains me when any one speaks about my honoured master. As for
your oath we will let it alone, but I only wish he may come, as do Penelope,
his old father Laertes, and his son Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about
this same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be
no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or
man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get
news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming
home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in Ithaca.
But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or else to escape
if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect him. And now, old man,
tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want to know, who you are and where
you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came
in, how crew brought you to Ithaca, and from what country they professed to
come—for you cannot have come by land.”




And Ulysses answered, “I will tell you all about it. If there were meat and
wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do but to eat
and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily talk on for a whole
twelve months without ever finishing the story of the sorrows with which it has
pleased heaven to visit me.




“I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many sons born
in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had purchased for a
concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax (whose lineage I claim,
and who was held in the highest honour among the Cretans for his wealth,
prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me on the same level with my
brothers who had been born in wedlock. When, however, death took him to the
house of Hades, his sons divided his estate and cast lots for their shares, but
to me they gave a holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me
to marry into a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on
the field of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you
can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars and
Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the enemy
with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was the first to
leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was I in battle, but I
did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring
up children. My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things
that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another
another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to. Before the
Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign
service, and I amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first
instance, and much more was allotted to me later on.




“My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but when Jove
counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many perished, the people
required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to Troy, and there was no way out
of it, for they insisted on our doing so. There we fought for nine whole years,
but in the tenth we sacked the city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven
dispersed us. Then it was that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one
month happily with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the
idea of making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it.
I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and my
men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods
and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail from
Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a river.
Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness on board, but
sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and steersmen took them. On
the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the
river, bidding my men stay by them and keep guard over them while I sent out
scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.




“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the
land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children
captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the war
cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with horsemen
and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my
men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves
surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do
forced labour for them. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and I wish
I had died then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store
for me—I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then
I went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees and kissed them,
whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took me weeping to
his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and tried to kill me in
their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared the wrath of Jove the
protector of strangers, who punishes those who do evil.




“I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on for
eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who had already
committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over into going with
him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions lay. I stayed there for a
whole twelve months, but at the end of that time when months and days had gone
by till the same season had come round again, he set me on board a ship bound
for Libya, on a pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to that
place, but really that he might sell me as a slave and take the money I
fetched. I suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not
help it.




“The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea that lies
between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their destruction, for
as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see nothing but sea and sky,
he raised a black cloud over our ship and the sea grew dark beneath it. Then
Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and the ship went round and round and was
filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men fell all
into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like
so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting
home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship’s mast within my
reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted before the fury of
the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darkness of the tenth night a great
wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast. There Pheidon king of the
Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without charging me anything at all—for
his son found me when I was nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he
raised me by the hand, took me to his father’s house and gave me clothes to
wear.




“There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he had
entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his homeward
journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought iron that Ulysses
had got together. There was enough to keep his family for ten generations, so
much had he left in the house of king Pheidon. But the king said Ulysses had
gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the god’s high oak tree,
and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or
in secret. Moreover the king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in
his own house as he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew
found, that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before
Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the
wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge of her to be
sure and take me safely to King Acastus.




“These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the very
extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land they
resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt and cloak that
I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old clouts in which you now see
me; then, towards nightfall, they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there
they bound me with a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to
get supper by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having
drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck
out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood
in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and went
searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further use and
went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily, then took me
to a good man’s door—for it seems that I am not to die yet awhile.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Poor unhappy stranger, I have found
the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that part about
Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe it. Why should a man
like you go about telling lies in this way? I know all about the return of my
master. The gods one and all of them detest him, or they would have taken him
before Troy, or let him die with friends around him when the days of his
fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
ashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds
have spirited him away we know not whither.




“As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the town
unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news about Ulysses.
Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who grieve over the
king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because they can eat up his
property without paying for it. For my own part I have never cared about asking
anyone else since the time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a
man and come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I was very kind
to him. He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting
his ships which had been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the
following summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much
wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my
door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not for any
such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Jove the
god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you.”




Ulysses answered, “I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have given you
my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a bargain, and call
all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master comes home, give me a
cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to Dulichium where I want to go; but
if he does not come as I say he will, set your men on to me, and tell them to
throw me from yonder precipice, as a warning to tramps not to go about the
country telling lies.”




“And a pretty figure I should cut then,” replied Eumaeus, “both now and
hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and showing
you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest if I did; but
it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in directly, that we may
cook something savoury for supper.”




Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the pigs,
which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a tremendous
squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But Eumaeus called to
his men and said, “Bring in the best pig you have, that I may sacrifice him for
this stranger, and we will take toll of him ourselves. We have had trouble
enough this long time feeding pigs, while others reap the fruit of our labour.”




On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine fat five
year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not forget the gods,
for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing he did was to cut
bristles from the pig’s face and throw them into the fire, praying to all the
gods as he did so that Ulysses might return home again. Then he clubbed the pig
with a billet of oak which he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood,
and stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it
up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the
fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut
the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them
till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they threw them on
to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then
stood up to give every one his share. He made seven portions; one of these he
set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he did
so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices
cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much
pleased. “I hope, Eumaeus,” said he, “that Jove will be as well disposed
towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like
myself.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Eat, my good fellow, and enjoy your
supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that, just as he thinks
right, for he can do whatever he chooses.”




As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice to
the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the cup in the hands
of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion. Mesaulius brought them their
bread; the swineherd had brought this man on his own account from among the
Taphians during his master’s absence, and had paid for him with his own money
without saying anything either to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their
hands upon the good things that were before them, and when they had had enough
to eat and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all
went to bed after having made a hearty supper.




Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It poured
without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is a wet
quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the excellent care
he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give it him, or make one of
his men give him one. “Listen to me,” said he, “Eumaeus and the rest of you;
when I have said a prayer I will tell you something. It is the wine that makes
me talk in this way; wine will make even a wise man fall to singing; it will
make him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had better leave
unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young
and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses
were the leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would have it
so. When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our
armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew
about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the snow fell
small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick with rime.
The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably enough with
their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left my cloak behind
me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my
shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds through and the stars had
shifted their places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and
he at once gave me his ear.




“‘Ulysses,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for I have no cloak;
some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt, and I do not
know what to do.’




“Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following plan:




“‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’ Then he
raised his head on his elbow.




“‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We are a
long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell Agamemnon to
send us up more men at once.’




“On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running to the
ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough till morning.
Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those days, for then some
one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out of good will and for the
respect due to a brave soldier; but now people look down upon me because my
clothes are shabby.”




And Eumaeus answered, “Old man, you have told us an excellent story, and have
said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the present, therefore,
you shall want neither clothing nor anything else that a stranger in distress
may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning you have to shake your own old
rags about your body again, for we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up
here, but every man has only one. When Ulysses’ son comes home again he will
give you both cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.”




With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins and
sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here Ulysses lay down, and
Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he kept for a change in
case of extraordinarily bad weather.




Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the swineherd
did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready to go outside, and
Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his property during his master’s
absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny shoulders and put on a thick
cloak to keep out the wind. He also took the skin of a large and well fed goat,
and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his
rest where the pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them
shelter from the North wind.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 15 ===

MINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON—HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS AT PYLOS
AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA—ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF EUMAEUS.




But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses’ son that he
was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping in the forecourt
of Menelaus’s house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, but Telemachus could get no
rest all night for thinking of his unhappy father, so Minerva went close up to
him and said:




“Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, nor leave
your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat up
everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool’s errand. Ask
Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to find your excellent mother
still there when you get back. Her father and brothers are already urging her
to marry Eurymachus, who has given her more than any of the others, and has
been greatly increasing his wedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have
been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know what women are—they
always want to do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never
give another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their
father either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, and put
everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you have, until
it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Let me tell you also of
another matter which you had better attend to. The chief men among the suitors
are lying in wait for you in the Strait [128] between Ithaca and Samos, and they
mean to kill you before you can reach home. I do not much think they will
succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are now eating up your
property will find a grave themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship
well away from the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will
send you a fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on to
the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge of your
pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore, for the night,
and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got back safe from
Pylos.”




Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with his heel
to rouse him, and said, “Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the horses to the
chariot, for we must set off home.” [129] 




But Pisistratus said, “No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive in the
dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his presents and
put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good bye to us in the usual
way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget a host who has shown him
kindness.”




As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen, leaving
Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he put on his shirt as
fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his shoulders, and went out to meet
him. “Menelaus,” said he, “let me go back now to my own country, for I want to
get home.”




And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not detain
you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or too rude to
him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a man go when he wants
to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would like to stay. One should
treat a guest well as long as he is in the house and speed him when he wants to
leave it. Wait, then, till I can get your beautiful presents into your chariot,
and till you have yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a
sufficient dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out on such a
long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour in Hellas or in
the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct you myself through all
our principal cities. No one will send us away empty handed; every one will
give us something—a bronze tripod, a couple of mules, or a gold cup.”




“Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once, for when I came
away I left my property without protection, and fear that while looking for my
father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that something valuable has been
stolen during my absence.”




When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to prepare a
sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At this moment
Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got up; so Menelaus
told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he at once did. Then
Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room, [130] not alone, but Helen went too, with
Megapenthes. When he reached the place where the treasures of his house were
kept, he selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a
silver mixing bowl. Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely
dresses which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was
largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like a
star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. [131] Then they all came back through the
house again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said, “Telemachus, may
Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home according to your
desire. I will now present you with the finest and most precious piece of plate
in all my house. It is a mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is
inlaid with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians
made me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on
my return home. I should like to give it to you.”




With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus, while
Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before him. Hard by
stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.




“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as a keepsake from the hand
of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day. Till then, get
your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go back rejoicing to your own
country and to your home.”




So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then
Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as he did
so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the house, and they
both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought them water in a
beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their
hands, and she drew a clean table beside them; an upper servant brought them
bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes
poured out the wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were
before them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and
Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot. They drove
out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer
court, and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right
hand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood in
front of the horses and pledged them, saying, “Farewell to both of you; see
that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me as any
father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy.”




“We will be sure, sir,” answered Telemachus, “to tell him everything as soon as
we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses returned when I get
back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very great kindness you have shown
me and of the many beautiful presents I am taking with me.”




As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with a great
white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm yard—and all
the men and women were running after it and shouting. It came quite close up to
them and flew away on their right hands in front of the horses. When they saw
it they were glad, and their hearts took comfort within them, whereon
Pisistratus said, “Tell me, Menelaus, has heaven sent this omen for us or for
you?”




Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to make, but
Helen was too quick for him and said, “I will read this matter as heaven has
put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come to pass. The eagle
came from the mountain where it was bred and has its nest, and in like manner
Ulysses, after having travelled far and suffered much, will return to take his
revenge—if indeed he is not back already and hatching mischief for the
suitors.”




“May Jove so grant it,” replied Telemachus, “if it should prove to be so, I
will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at home.”




As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed through the
town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon their necks and
travelled the whole day long till the sun set and darkness was over all the
land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles lived who was son of Ortilochus,
the son of Alpheus. There they passed the night and were treated hospitably.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their
horses and their places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner
gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus
lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came to
Pylos, and then Telemachus said:




“Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you. You
know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both of an age,
and this journey has brought us together still more closely; do not, therefore,
take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go to your father’s house he
will try to keep me in the warmth of his good will towards me, and I must go
home at once.”




Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he deemed
it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus’s beautiful
presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then he said, “Go on
board at once and tell your men to do so also before I can reach home to tell
my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am sure he will not let you go; he
will come down here to fetch you, and he will not go back without you. But he
will be very angry.”




With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and soon
reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave his orders.
“Now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on board the ship, and let us
set out home.”




Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But as
Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva in the
ship’s stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, a seer, who was
flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was descended from Melampus,
who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep; he was rich and owned a great
house, but he was driven into exile by the great and powerful king Neleus.
Neleus seized his goods and held them for a whole year, during which he was a
close prisoner in the house of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both
on account of the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great
sorrow that dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escaped
with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the wrong that
had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother. Then he left
the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that he should reign over
much people. There he married, established himself, and had two famous sons
Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of
Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not
live to old age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman’s gifts. His
sons were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was
father to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried off Cleitus
for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwell among the immortals, but Apollo made
Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now that Amphiaraus was dead.
He quarrelled with his father and went to live in Hyperesia, where he remained
and prophesied for all men.




His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was making
drink-offerings and praying in his ship. “Friend,” said he, “now that I find
you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your sacrifices themselves, and
by the god to whom you make them, I pray you also by your own head and by those
of your followers tell me the truth and nothing but the truth. Who and whence
are you? Tell me also of your town and parents.”




Telemachus said, “I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and my
father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come to some
miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew together to see
if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a long time.”




“I too,” answered Theoclymenus, “am an exile, for I have killed a man of my own
race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they have great power
among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at their hands, and am thus
doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth. I am your suppliant; take me,
therefore, on board your ship that they may not kill me, for I know they are in
pursuit.”




“I will not refuse you,” replied Telemachus, “if you wish to join us. Come,
therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according to what we
have.”




On this he received Theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck of the
ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus sit beside
him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them to catch hold of the
ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set the mast in its socket in the
cross plank, raised it and made it fast with the forestays, and they hoisted
their white sails with sheets of twisted ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind
that blew fresh and strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible.
Thus then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis.




Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel made a
quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans rule. Telemachus
then headed her for the flying islands, [132] wondering within himself whether he
should escape death or should be taken prisoner.




Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut, and
the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses
began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would continue to treat
him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or pack him off to the city;
so he said:




“Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging about
the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give me your
advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me and show me the
way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs must, to see if any one
will give me a drink and a piece of bread. I should like also to go to the
house of Ulysses and bring news of her husband to Queen Penelope. I could then
go about among the suitors and see if out of all their abundance they will give
me a dinner. I should soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways.
Listen and believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives
grace and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would
make a more handy servant than I should—to put fresh wood on the fire, chop
fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that poor men have
to do for their betters.”




The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. “Heaven help me,” he
exclaimed, “what ever can have put such a notion as that into your head? If you
go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty, for their pride and
insolence reach the very heavens. They would never think of taking a man like
you for a servant. Their servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good
cloaks and shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the
tables are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay
where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; I do not mind your being
here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home he will give
you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you want to go.”




Ulysses answered, “I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to me, for
having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there is nothing
worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men have once got low down in
the world they will go through a great deal on behalf of their miserable
bellies. Since, however, you press me to stay here and await the return of
Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses’ mother, and his father whom he left on the
threshold of old age when he set out for Troy. Are they still living or are
they already dead and in the house of Hades?”




“I will tell you all about them,” replied Eumaeus, “Laertes is still living and
prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house, for he is terribly
distressed about the absence of his son, and also about the death of his wife,
which grieved him greatly and aged him more than anything else did. She came to
an unhappy end [133] through sorrow for her son: may no
friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come to such an end as she did.
As long as she was still living, though she was always grieving, I used to like
seeing her and asking her how she did, for she brought me up along with her
daughter Ctimene, the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together,
and she made little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, they
sent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me, my
mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, and
sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever. This is
all over now. Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in the situation
which I now hold. I have enough to eat and drink, and can find something for
any respectable stranger who comes here; but there is no getting a kind word or
deed out of my mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked
people. Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her;
they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and something too to
take back with them into the country. This is what will keep servants in a good
humour.”




Ulysses answered, “Then you must have been a very little fellow, Eumaeus, when
you were taken so far away from your home and parents. Tell me, and tell me
true, was the city in which your father and mother lived sacked and pillaged,
or did some enemies carry you off when you were alone tending sheep or cattle,
ship you off here, and sell you for whatever your master gave them?”




“Stranger,” replied Eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, make
yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights are now at
their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and sitting up talking
together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time, too much sleep is as bad as
too little; if any one of the others wishes to go to bed let him leave us and
do so; he can then take my master’s pigs out when he has done breakfast in the
morning. We too will sit here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one
another stories about our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and
been buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory of
sorrows that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, my tale is as
follows:




“You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above Ortygia, [134] where the land
begins to turn round and look in another direction. [135] It is not very thickly peopled, but
the soil is good, with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds
with wine and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by
any sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them
with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole country is
divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus, a man comparable
to the gods, reigned over both.




“Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for the
Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted with gewgaws
of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in my father’s house,
very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; these scoundrels got hold of
her one day when she was washing near their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her
in ways that no woman can resist, no matter how good she may be by nature. The
man who had seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on
this she told him her father’s name. ‘I come from Sidon,’ said she, ‘and am
daughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming into the
town from the country, some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the
sea, where they sold me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them their
price for me.’




“The man who had seduced her then said, ‘Would you like to come along with us
to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves? They are both
alive and are said to be well off.’




“‘I will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear me a solemn
oath that you will do me no harm by the way.’




“They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oath the
woman said, ‘Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street or at the
well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and tell my
master, in which case he would suspect something. He would put me in prison,
and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel therefore; buy your
merchandise as fast as you can, and send me word when you have done loading. I
will bring as much gold as I can lay my hands on, and there is something else
also that I can do towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good
man of the house, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I will carry
him off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if you
take him and sell him in foreign parts.’




“On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole year till
they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise, and then, when they
had got freight enough, they sent to tell the woman. Their messenger, a very
cunning fellow, came to my father’s house bringing a necklace of gold with
amber beads strung among it; and while my mother and the servants had it in
their hands admiring it and bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the
woman and then went back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led
me out of the house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with
the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in attendance
on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public assembly, so she
snatched up three cups and carried them off in the bosom of her dress, while I
followed her, for I knew no better. The sun was now set, and darkness was over
all the land, so we hurried on as fast as we could till we reached the harbour,
where the Phoenician ship was lying. When they had got on board they sailed
their ways over the sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind;
six days did we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck
the woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she were a
sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the seals and
fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the winds and waves
took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of his chattels for me, and
thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon this country.”




Ulysses answered, “Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes with the
most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as well as evil, for
in spite of everything you have a good master, who sees that you always have
enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good life, whereas I am still going
about begging my way from city to city.”




Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for sleep,
for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and his crew were nearing
land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast, and rowed the ship into the
harbour. [136] 
They cast out their mooring stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out
upon the sea shore, mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had
had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said, “Take the ship on to the town, but
leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my farms. In the
evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to the city, and
to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you all a good dinner
with meat and wine.” [137] 




Then Theoclymenus said, “And what, my dear young friend, is to become of me? To
whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or shall I go straight
to your own house and to your mother?”




“At any other time,” replied Telemachus, “I should have bidden you go to my own
house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the present moment,
however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall be away, and my mother
will not see you; she does not often show herself even to the suitors, but sits
at her loom weaving in an upper chamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a
man whose house you can go to—I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held
in the highest estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and
the most persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
trying to take Ulysses’ place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knows whether or
no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes place.”




As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, Apollo’s
messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore them
off, [138] fell to
the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship. On this Theoclymenus called
him apart and caught him by the hand. “Telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not
fly on your right hand without having been sent there by some god. As soon as I
saw it I knew it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that
there will be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own.”




“I wish it may prove so,” answered Telemachus. “If it does, I will show you so
much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet you will
congratulate you.”




Then he said to his friend Piraeus, “Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have
throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who have
accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to your own house
and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him.”




And Piraeus answered, “Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you please, but
I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of hospitality.”




As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose the
hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus bound on his
sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head of sharpened bronze from
the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the hawsers, thrust the ship off from
land, and made on towards the city as they had been told to do, while
Telemachus strode on as fast as he could, till he reached the homestead where
his countless herds of swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent
swineherd, who was so devoted a servant to his master.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 16 ===

ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.




Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were were
getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out with the
pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned upon him, so
Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the dogs did not bark,
said to Eumaeus:




“Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of your
acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and not
barking.”




The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.
Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine fell from
his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head and both his
beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be more delighted at the
return of an only son, the child of his old age, after ten years’ absence in a
foreign country and after having gone through much hardship. He embraced him,
kissed him all over as though he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly
to him saying:




“So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I heard you
had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any more. Come in,
my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look at you now you are
home again; it is not very often you come into the country to see us herdsmen;
you stick pretty close to the town generally. I suppose you think it better to
keep an eye on what the suitors are doing.”




“So be it, old friend,” answered Telemachus, “but I am come now because I want
to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old home or whether
some one else has married her, so that the bed of Ulysses is without bedding
and covered with cobwebs.”




“She is still at the house,” replied Eumaeus, “grieving and breaking her heart,
and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.”




As he spoke he took Telemachus’ spear, whereon he crossed the stone threshold
and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place as he entered,
but Telemachus checked him; “Sit down, stranger,” said he, “I can easily find
another seat, and there is one here who will lay it for me.”




Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green brushwood on
the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus to sit upon. Then
the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the remains from what they
had eaten the day before, and he filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as
he could. He mixed wine also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing
Ulysses. Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them,
and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus,
“Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew bring him to
Ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly he did not come here by land.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “My son, I will tell you the real
truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great traveller. At this
moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship, and has taken refuge at my
station, so I will put him into your hands. Do whatever you like with him, only
remember that he is your suppliant.”




“I am very much distressed,” said Telemachus, “by what you have just told me.
How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young, and am not
strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My mother cannot make up
her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the house out of respect
for public opinion and the memory of her husband, or whether the time is now
come for her to take the best man of those who are wooing her, and the one who
will make her the most advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to
your station I will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and
sandals, and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep
him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no
burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors, for
they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat him in a way that would
greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can do nothing against
numbers, for they will be too strong for him.”




Then Ulysses said, “Sir, it is right that I should say something myself. I am
much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in which the
suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are. Tell me, do you
submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your people against you?
May you not complain of your brothers—for it is to these that a man may look
for support, however great his quarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you
are and in my present mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses
himself, I would rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to
the house and be the bane of every one of these men. [139] If they were too many for me—I
being single-handed—I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such
disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men
dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine drawn
recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end that shall never be
accomplished.”




And Telemachus answered, “I will tell you truly everything. There is no enmity
between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom a man may
look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove has made us a race of
only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and Ulysses only son of
Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses who left me behind him when he
went away, so that I have never been of any use to him. Hence it comes that my
house is in the hands of numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the
neighbouring islands, Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men
of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to
my mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yet
bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long
will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue, however, rests with heaven.
But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe and
have returned from Pylos. Tell it to herself alone, and then come back here
without letting any one else know, for there are many who are plotting mischief
against me.”




“I understand and heed you,” replied Eumaeus; “you need instruct me no further,
only as I am going that way say whether I had not better let poor Laertes know
that you are returned. He used to superintend the work on his farm in spite of
his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would eat and drink at will along with
his servants; but they tell me that from the day on which you set out for Pylos
he has neither eaten nor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his
farm, but sits weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.”




“More’s the pity,” answered Telemachus, “I am sorry for him, but we must leave
him to himself just now. If people could have everything their own way, the
first thing I should choose would be the return of my father; but go, and give
your message; then make haste back again, and do not turn out of your way to
tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send one of her women secretly with the news at
once, and let him hear it from her.”




Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals, bound
them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched him well off the
station, and then came up to it in the form of a woman—fair, stately, and wise.
She stood against the side of the entry, and revealed herself to Ulysses, but
Telemachus could not see her, and knew not that she was there, for the gods do
not let themselves be seen by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs,
for they did not bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the
yards. She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the yards. Then
she said to him:




“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your son: do not
keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the destruction of the
suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be long in joining you, for I
too am eager for the fray.”




As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw a fair clean
shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him younger and of more
imposing presence; she gave him back his colour, filled out his cheeks, and let
his beard become dark again. Then she went away and Ulysses came back inside
the hut. His son was astounded when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for
fear he might be looking upon a god.




“Stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you were a moment
or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is not the same. Are
you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If so, be propitious to
me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings of wrought gold. Have mercy
upon me.”




And Ulysses said, “I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am your
father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands of lawless
men.”




As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the ground,
for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus could not yet believe
that it was his father, and said:




“You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes that I
may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself contrive to do as
you have been doing, and make yourself old and young at a moment’s notice,
unless a god were with him. A second ago you were old and all in rags, and now
you are like some god come down from heaven.”




Ulysses answered, “Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably astonished
at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will come hereafter.
Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much hardship have got home
in the twentieth year to my own country. What you wonder at is the work of the
redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with me whatever she will, for she can do
what she pleases. At one moment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a
young man with good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who
live in heaven to make any man look either rich or poor.”




As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father and
wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles or
vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half fledged young
by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun would have gone down
upon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly said, “In what ship, my dear
father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca? Of what nation did they declare
themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land?”




“I will tell you the truth, my son,” replied Ulysses. “It was the Phaeacians
who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the habit of giving
escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took me over the sea while I
was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after giving me many presents in
bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by heaven’s mercy are lying concealed
in a cave, and I am now come here on the suggestion of Minerva that we may
consult about killing our enemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the
suitors, with their number, that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can
then turn the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the
whole body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.”




To this Telemachus answered, “Father, I have always heard of your renown both
in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very great one: I am
awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand against many and brave
ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor twice ten, but ten many times over;
you shall learn their number at once. There are fifty-two chosen youths from
Dulichium, and they have six servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty
young Achaeans from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well
born. They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at
table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue your
coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some one who would be
willing to come and help us.”




“Listen to me,” replied Ulysses, “and think whether Minerva and her father Jove
may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some one else as well.”




“Those whom you have named,” answered Telemachus, “are a couple of good allies,
for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power over both gods
and men.”




“These two,” continued Ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray, when the
suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return home early
to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before. Later on the
swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a miserable old beggar. If you
see them ill treating me, steel your heart against my sufferings; even though
they drag me feet foremost out of the house, or throw things at me, look on and
do nothing beyond gently trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they
will not listen to you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore
I say, and lay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I
will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all the
armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room. Make some
excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say that you have
taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it
was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add
to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel
over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace
both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use
them. But leave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple of
oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva
will then soon quiet these people. There is also another matter; if you are
indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let no one know that Ulysses is
within the house—neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of the
servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit the women alone,
and let us also make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who is on
our side and whose hand is against us.”




“Father,” replied Telemachus, “you will come to know me by and by, and when you
do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think, however, the
plan you propose will turn out well for either of us. Think it over. It will
take us a long time to go the round of the farms and exploit the men, and all
the time the suitors will be wasting your estate with impunity and without
compunction. Prove the women by all means, to see who are disloyal and who
guiltless, but I am not in favour of going round and trying the men. We can
attend to that later on, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will
support you.”




Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought Telemachus and
his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When they had come inside
the harbour they drew the ship on to the land; their servants came and took
their armour from them, and they left all the presents at the house of Clytius.
Then they sent a servant to tell Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the
country, but had sent the ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed
and made unhappy. This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both
on the same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the
servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting women,
“Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos”; but Eumaeus went close up to
Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden him tell her. When he
had given his message he left the house with its outbuildings and went back to
his pigs again.




The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went outside
the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a council near the main
entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak.




“My friends,” said he, “this voyage of Telemachus’s is a very serious matter;
we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however, let us draw a
ship into the water, and get a crew together to send after the others and tell
them to come back as fast as they can.”




He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw the
ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and putting by their
oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, “We need not send them any
message, for they are here. Some god must have told them, or else they saw the
ship go by, and could not overtake her.”




On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the ship on
shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went up in a body
to the place of assembly, but they would not let any one old or young sit along
with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke first.




“Good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man from
destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day long,
and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but waited in the
ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and killing him; but some
god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let us consider how we can make an
end of him. He must not escape us; our affair is never likely to come off while
he is alive, for he is very shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on
our side. We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he
will lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell
all the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The people
will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us no
hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try and lay hold of
him either on his farm away from the town, or on the road hither. Then we can
divide up his property amongst us, and let his mother and the man who marries
her have the house. If this does not please you, and you wish Telemachus to
live on and hold his father’s property, then we must not gather here and eat up
his goods in this way, but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own
house, and she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot
it is to win her.”




They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the son of
Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the suitors
from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his conversation,
moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any of the other suitors,
for he was a man of good natural disposition. “My friends,” said he, speaking
to them plainly and in all honestly, “I am not in favour of killing Telemachus.
It is a heinous thing to kill one who is of noble blood. Let us first take
counsel of the gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to
kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade us,
I would have you hold your hands.”




Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose forthwith and
went to the house of Ulysses, where they took their accustomed seats.




Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She knew of
the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard their counsels
and had told her; she went down therefore to the court attended by her maidens,
and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts
supporting the roof of the cloister holding a veil before her face, and rebuked
Antinous saying:




“Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best speaker and
counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are nothing of the kind.
Madman, why should you try to compass the death of Telemachus, and take no heed
of suppliants, whose witness is Jove himself? It is not right for you to plot
thus against one another. Do you not remember how your father fled to this
house in fear of the people, who were enraged against him for having gone with
some Taphian pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us?
They wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses
stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour his
property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his wife and
trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the others also.”




To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, “Take heart, Queen Penelope
daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters. The man
is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon your son
Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth. I say—and it
shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened with his blood; for many a time
has Ulysses taken me on his knees, held wine up to my lips to drink, and put
pieces of meat into my hands. Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I
have, and has nothing to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death
comes to him from the gods, he cannot escape it.” He said this to quiet her,
but in reality he was plotting against Telemachus.




Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva shed
sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses and his son,
who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were helping one another
to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to Ulysses, turned him into an
old man with a stroke of her wand, and clad him in his old clothes again, for
fear that the swineherd might recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and
tell Penelope.




Telemachus was the first to speak. “So you have got back, Eumaeus,” said he.
“What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or are they still
waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?”




“I did not think of asking about that,” replied Eumaeus, “when I was in the
town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I could. I met
a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he was the first to
tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I saw with my own eyes; I had
just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury above the town when I saw a
ship coming into harbour with a number of men in her. They had many shields and
spears, and I thought it was the suitors, but I cannot be sure.”




On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus could not
see him.




Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate it,
and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As soon as they
had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of
sleep.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 17 ===

TELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET—ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE TOWN, AND
ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS—HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE DOG ARGOS—HE IS
INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH A STOOL—PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE
SHALL BE SENT TO HER.




When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus bound on
his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for he wanted to go
into the city. “Old friend,” said he to the swineherd, “I will now go to the
town and show myself to my mother, for she will never leave off grieving till
she has seen me. As for this unfortunate stranger, take him to the town and let
him beg there of any one who will give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have
trouble enough of my own, and cannot be burdened with other people. If this
makes him angry so much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean.”




Then Ulysses said, “Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can always do
better in town than country, for any one who likes can give him something. I am
too old to care about remaining here at the beck and call of a master.
Therefore let this man do as you have just told him, and take me to the town as
soon as I have had a warm by the fire, and the day has got a little heat in it.
My clothes are wretchedly thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished
with cold, for you say the city is some way off.”




On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge upon the
suitors. When he reached home he stood his spear against a bearing-post of the
cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister itself, and went inside.




Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting the
fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to him; all the
other maids came up too, and covered his head and shoulders with their kisses.
Penelope came out of her room looking like Diana or Venus, and wept as she
flung her arms about her son. She kissed his forehead and both his beautiful
eyes, “Light of my eyes,” she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are
come home again; I made sure I was never going to see you any more. To think of
your having gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining my
consent. But come, tell me what you saw.”




“Do not scold me, mother,” answered Telemachus, “nor vex me, seeing what a
narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress, go upstairs
with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if
Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors. I must now go to the
place of assembly to invite a stranger who has come back with me from Pylos. I
sent him on with my crew, and told Piraeus to take him home and look after him
till I could come for him myself.”




She heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and vowed full
and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only vouchsafe her
revenge upon the suitors.




Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—not alone, for
his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with a presence of such
divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, and the suitors
gathered round him with fair words in their mouths and malice in their hearts;
but he avoided them, and went to sit with Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses,
old friends of his father’s house, and they made him tell them all that had
happened to him. Then Piraeus came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted
through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined
them. Piraeus was first to speak: “Telemachus,” said he, “I wish you would send
some of your women to my house to take away the presents Menelaus gave you.”




“We do not know, Piraeus,” answered Telemachus, “what may happen. If the
suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them, I would
rather you had the presents than that any of those people should get hold of
them. If on the other hand I managed to kill them, I shall be much obliged if
you will kindly bring me my presents.”




With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they got there
they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the baths, and
washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed them, and had given
them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at table. A maid servant then
brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver
basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An
upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of what
there was in the house. Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one
of the bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to
eat and drink Penelope said:




“Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which I have
not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out for Troy with
the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear to me before the
suitors came back to the house, whether or no you had been able to hear
anything about the return of your father.”




“I will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “We went to Pylos and saw
Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably as though I were
a son of his own who had just returned after a long absence; so also did his
sons; but he said he had not heard a word from any human being about Ulysses,
whether he was alive or dead. He sent me, therefore, with a chariot and horses
to Menelaus. There I saw Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and
Trojans, were in heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it
was that had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereon
he said, ‘So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind might
as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed
in the forest or in some grassy dell. The lion, when he comes back to his lair,
will make short work with the pair of them, and so will Ulysses with these
suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that
he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily
that all the Greeks cheered him—if he is still such, and were to come near
these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards
your question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the
old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full. He said he could
see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso,
who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no
ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ This was what Menelaus told me,
and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then gave me a fair wind
and soon brought me safe home again.”




With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said to her:




“Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things; listen
therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide nothing from you.
May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the rites of hospitality, with
that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come, that Ulysses himself is even now in
Ithaca, and, either going about the country or staying in one place, is
enquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a day of reckoning for the
suitors. I saw an omen when I was on the ship which meant this, and I told
Telemachus about it.”




“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true, you shall
have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall
congratulate you.”




Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or aiming
with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the house, and
behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now time for dinner, and
the flock of sheep and goats had come into the town from all the country round,
[140] with their
shepherds as usual, then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited
upon them at table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have had enough
sport, so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing,
at dinner time.”




They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the house,
they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then sacrificed
some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and well grown. [141] Thus they made
ready for their meal. In the meantime Ulysses and the swineherd were about
starting for the town, and the swineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose you still
want to go to town to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I
should have liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my
master tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one’s master
is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broad day; it will
be night again directly and then you will find it colder.” [142] 




“I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need say no more. Let us be
going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to walk with, for you
say the road is a very rough one.”




As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders, by the
cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his liking. The two
then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs and herdsmen who
remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his master followed after,
looking like some broken down old tramp as he leaned upon his staff, and his
clothes were all in rags. When they had got over the rough steep ground and
were nearing the city, they reached the fountain from which the citizens drew
their water. This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a
grove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear
cold water came down to it from a rock high up, [143] while above the fountain there was
an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used to sacrifice. Here
Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was driving down some goats, the
best in his flock, for the suitors’ dinner, and there were two shepherds with
him. When he saw Eumaeus and Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous and
unseemly language, which made Ulysses very angry.




“There you go,” cried he, “and a precious pair you are. See how heaven brings
birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, master swineherd, are
you taking this poor miserable object? It would make any one sick to see such a
creature at table. A fellow like this never won a prize for anything in his
life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders against every man’s door post,
and begging, not for swords and cauldrons [144] like a man, but only for a few
scraps not worth begging for. If you would give him to me for a hand on my
station, he might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to
the kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but he
has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he will do
nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiable belly. I
say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he goes near Ulysses’ house he will
get his head broken by the stools they will fling at him, till they turn him
out.”




On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure
wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path. For a
moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him with his
staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he resolved,
however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the swineherd looked
straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his hands and praying to
heaven as he did so.




“Fountain nymphs,” he cried, “children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned you
thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my prayer that
heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to the swaggering threats
with which such men as you go about insulting people—gadding all over the town
while your flocks are going to ruin through bad shepherding.”




Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, “You ill conditioned cur, what are you
talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship and take you to a
foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the money you will fetch. I
wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike Telemachus dead this very day, or
that the suitors would kill him, as I am that Ulysses will never come home
again.”




With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went quickly
forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he got there he went in
and took his seat among the suitors opposite Eurymachus, who liked him better
than any of the others. The servants brought him a portion of meat, and an
upper woman servant set bread before him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses
and the swineherd came up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music,
for Phemius was just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold
of the swineherd’s hand, and said:




“Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how far you go,
you will find few like it. One building keeps following on after another. The
outer court has a wall with battlements all round it; the doors are double
folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a hard matter to take it by force
of arms. I perceive, too, that there are many people banqueting within it, for
there is a smell of roast meat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods
have made to go along with feasting.”




Then Eumaeus said, “You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally do; but
let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside first and join
the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you wait here and let me go in
first? But do not wait long, or some one may see you loitering about outside,
and throw something at you. Consider this matter I pray you.”




And Ulysses answered, “I understand and heed. Go in first and leave me here
where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things thrown at me. I
have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that I am case-hardened, and
this too may go with the rest. But a man cannot hide away the cravings of a
hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives much trouble to all men; it is
because of this that ships are fitted out to sail the seas, and to make war
upon other people.”




As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his head and
pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred before setting out
for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him. In the old days he used to
be taken out by the young men when they went hunting wild goats, or deer, or
hares, but now that his master was gone he was lying neglected on the heaps of
mule and cow dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men should
come and draw it away to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas. As
soon as he saw Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail,
but he could not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on the
other side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus seeing
it, and said:




“Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap: his build
is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he only one of those
dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept merely for show?”




“This hound,” answered Eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in a far country.
If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he would soon show you what
he could do. There was not a wild beast in the forest that could get away from
him when he was once on its tracks. But now he has fallen on evil times, for
his master is dead and gone, and the women take no care of him. Servants never
do their work when their master’s hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes
half the goodness out of a man when he makes a slave of him.”




As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the suitors
were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.




Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him to come
and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying near where the
carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he picked it up, brought
it to Telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite him. Then the servant brought
him his portion, and gave him bread from the bread-basket.




Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor miserable old
beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in rags. He sat down upon
the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors leading from the outer to the
inner court, and against a bearing-post of cypress-wood which the carpenter had
skilfully planed, and had made to join truly with rule and line. Telemachus
took a whole loaf from the bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in
his two hands, and said to Eumaeus, “Take this to the stranger, and tell him to
go the round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not be
shamefaced.”




So Eumaeus went up to him and said, “Stranger, Telemachus sends you this, and
says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for beggars must not be
shamefaced.”




Ulysses answered, “May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, and fulfil
the desire of his heart.”




Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it on the
dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while the bard was singing,
and had just finished his dinner as he left off. The suitors applauded the
bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and prompted him to beg pieces of
bread from each one of the suitors, that he might see what kind of people they
were, and tell the good from the bad; but come what might she was not going to
save a single one of them. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from
left to right, and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real
beggar. Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another
who he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius said,
“Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about him, for I have
seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but I know nothing about the
man himself, nor where he comes from.”




On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “You precious idiot,” he cried,
“what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not tramps and beggars
enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do you think it a small thing
that such people gather here to waste your master’s property—and must you needs
bring this man as well?”




And Eumaeus answered, “Antinous, your birth is good but your words evil. It was
no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to invite a stranger from a
foreign country, unless it be one of those who can do public service as a seer,
a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who can charm us with his singing?
Such men are welcome all the world over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar
who will only worry him. You are always harder on Ulysses’ servants than any of
the other suitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as
Telemachus and Penelope are alive and here.”




But Telemachus said, “Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the bitterest
tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse.”




Then turning to Antinous he said, “Antinous, you take as much care of my
interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see this stranger
turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take something and give it him
yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mind my mother, nor any
of the other servants in the house; but I know you will not do what I say, for
you are more fond of eating things yourself than of giving them to other
people.”




“What do you mean, Telemachus,” replied Antinous, “by this swaggering talk? If
all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would not come here
again for another three months.”




As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from under the
table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but the other suitors
all gave him something, and filled his wallet with bread and meat; he was
about, therefore, to go back to the threshold and eat what the suitors had
given him, but he first went up to Antinous and said:




“Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you seem to
be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be the better giver,
and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I too was a rich man once, and had
a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am,
no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and
all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy,
but it pleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of roving
robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it. I stationed my
ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them and keep guard over
them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.




“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the
land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children
captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the
war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with
soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic
among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found
themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive
to do forced labour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met
them, to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in
Cyprus. Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery.”




Then Antinous said, “What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague us
during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court, [145] or I will give
you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and importunity; you have
begged of all the others, and they have given you lavishly, for they have
abundance round them, and it is easy to be free with other people’s property
when there is plenty of it.”




On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, “Your looks, my fine sir, are
better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would not spare a
poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in another man’s, and
surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you to give him even a piece
of bread.”




This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, “You shall pay for
this before you get clear of the court.” With these words he threw a footstool
at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near the top of his back.
Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not even stagger him, but he
shook his head in silence as he brooded on his revenge. Then he went back to
the threshold and sat down there, laying his well filled wallet at his feet.




“Listen to me,” he cried, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even
as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he gets hit while fighting
for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and even so Antinous has hit me
while in the service of my miserable belly, which is always getting people into
trouble. Still, if the poor have gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them
that Antinous may come to a bad end before his marriage.”




“Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off elsewhere,”
shouted Antinous. “If you say more I will have you dragged hand and foot
through the courts, and the servants shall flay you alive.”




The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young men said,
“Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a tramp: it will be
worse for you if he should turn out to be some god—and we know the gods go
about disguised in all sorts of ways as people from foreign countries, and
travel about the world to see who do amiss and who righteously.” [146] 




Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile Telemachus was
furious about the blow that had been given to his father, and though no tear
fell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded on his revenge.




Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the
banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “Would that Apollo would so
strike you, Antinous,” and her waiting woman Eurynome answered, “If our prayers
were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see the sun rise.” Then
Penelope said, “Nurse, [147] I hate every single one of them,
for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like the darkness of
death itself. A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging about the house for
sheer want. Every one else has given him something to put in his wallet, but
Antinous has hit him on the right shoulder-blade with a footstool.”




Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the
meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the swineherd and
said, “Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I want to see him and
ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled much, and he may have seen
or heard something of my unhappy husband.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “If these Achaeans, Madam, would
only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his adventures. I had
him three days and three nights with me in my hut, which was the first place he
reached after running away from his ship, and he has not yet completed the
story of his misfortunes. If he had been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the
whole world, on whose lips all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been
more charmed as I sat in my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old
friendship between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete
where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither and
thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard of
Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians, and that he is
bringing great wealth home with him.”




“Call him here, then,” said Penelope, “that I too may hear his story. As for
the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they will, for they
have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remain unwasted in their houses
with none but servants to consume them, while they keep hanging about our house
day after day sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets,
and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No
estate can stand such recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us.
If he were to come again, he and his son would soon have their revenge.”




As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded with
it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus, “Go and call the
stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just as I was speaking? This can
only mean that all the suitors are going to be killed, and that not one of them
shall escape. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am
satisfied that the stranger is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and
cloak of good wear.”




When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, “Father stranger,
my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you; she is in great
grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her about her husband, and
if she is satisfied that you are speaking the truth, she will give you a shirt
and cloak, which are the very things that you are most in want of. As for
bread, you can get enough of that to fill your belly, by begging about the
town, and letting those give that will.”




“I will tell Penelope,” answered Ulysses, “nothing but what is strictly true. I
know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in affliction, but I
am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel suitors, for their pride and
insolence reach heaven. Just now, moreover, as I was going about the house
without doing any harm, a man gave me a blow that hurt me very much, but
neither Telemachus nor any one else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to
be patient and wait till sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire,
for my clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen them
ever since I first asked you to help me—she can then ask me about the return of
her husband.”




The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she saw him
cross the threshold, “Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus? Is he afraid that
some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming inside the house at all?
Beggars should not be shamefaced.”




To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “The stranger is quite reasonable.
He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one else would do. He
asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much better, madam, that you
should have him all to yourself, when you can hear him and talk to him as you
will.”




“The man is no fool,” answered Penelope, “it would very likely be as he says,
for there are no such abominable people in the whole world as these men are.”




When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he had
explained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear so that
none could overhear him, “My dear sir, I will now go back to the pigs, to see
after your property and my own business. You will look to what is going on
here, but above all be careful to keep out of danger, for there are many who
bear you ill will. May Jove bring them to a bad end before they do us a
mischief.”




“Very well,” replied Telemachus, “go home when you have had your dinner, and in
the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrifice for the day. Leave
the rest to heaven and me.”




On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his dinner he
left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and went back to his
pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to amuse themselves with singing
and dancing, for it was now getting on towards evening.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 18 ===

THE FIGHT WITH IRUS—ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS—PENELOPE GETS PRESENTS FROM THE
SUITORS—THE BRAZIERS—ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.




Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over the city
of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and drunkard. This man
had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great hulking fellow to look at;
his real name, the one his mother gave him, was Arnaeus, but the young men of
the place called him Irus, [148] because he used to run errands for
any one who would send him. As soon as he came he began to insult Ulysses, and
to try and drive him out of his own house.




“Be off, old man,” he cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be dragged out
neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me the wink, and
wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do so? Get up then,
and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”




Ulysses frowned on him and said, “My friend, I do you no manner of harm; people
give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is room enough in this
doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me things that are not
yours to give. You seem to be just such another tramp as myself, but perhaps
the gods will give us better luck by and by. Do not, however, talk too much
about fighting or you will incense me, and old though I am, I shall cover your
mouth and chest with blood. I shall have more peace tomorrow if I do, for you
will not come to the house of Ulysses any more.”




Irus was very angry and answered, “You filthy glutton, you run on trippingly
like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands about you, and knock
your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s tusks. Get ready, therefore,
and let these people here stand by and look on. You will never be able to fight
one who is so much younger than yourself.”




Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front of the
doorway, [149] and
when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed heartily and said to the others,
“This is the finest sport that you ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything
like it into this house. The stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to
fight, let us set them on to do so at once.”




The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged tramps.
“Listen to me,” said Antinous, “there are some goats’ paunches down at the
fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set aside for supper; he who
is victorious and proves himself to be the better man shall have his pick of
the lot; he shall be free of our table and we will not allow any other beggar
about the house at all.”




The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said, “Sirs,
an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his own against a
young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though I know it can only
end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear, however that none of you will
give me a foul blow to favour Irus and secure him the victory.”




They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath Telemachus
put in a word and said, “Stranger, if you have a mind to settle with this
fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here. Whoever strikes you will have
to fight more than one. I am host, and the other chiefs, Antinous and
Eurymachus, both of them men of understanding, are of the same mind as I am.”




Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins, thus
baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his mighty arms;
but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even stronger still. The suitors
were beyond measure astonished, and one would turn towards his neighbour
saying, “The stranger has brought such a thigh out of his old rags that there
will soon be nothing left of Irus.”




Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded him by
force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such a fright that
his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him and said, “You swaggering
bully, you ought never to have been born at all if you are afraid of such an
old broken down creature as this tramp is. I say, therefore—and it shall surely
be—if he beats you and proves himself the better man, I shall pack you off on
board ship to the mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one
that comes near him. He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your
entrails for the dogs to eat.”




This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle of the
court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses considered
whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end of him then and
there, or whether he should give him a lighter blow that should only knock him
down; in the end he deemed it best to give the lighter blow for fear the
Achaeans should begin to suspect who he was. Then they began to fight, and Irus
hit Ulysses on the right shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck
under the ear that broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing
out of his mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking
on the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of
laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him into the
outer court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him up against the wall
and put his staff in his hands. “Sit here,” said he, “and keep the dogs and
pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you try to make yourself king of
the beggars any more you shall fare still worse.”




Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his shoulder
with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon the threshold;
but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and saluting him, “May
Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you whatever you want for
having put an end to the importunity of this insatiable tramp. We will take him
over to the mainland presently, to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes
near him.”




Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’s paunch
before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves out of the
bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did so in a golden
goblet of wine. “Good luck to you,” he said, “father stranger, you are very
badly off at present, but I hope you will have better times by and by.”




To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I have
heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man both brave
and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to be a considerable
person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am saying. Man is the
vainest of all creatures that have their being upon earth. As long as heaven
vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks that he shall come to no harm
hereafter, and even when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as
he needs must, and makes the best of it; for God almighty gives men their daily
minds day by day. I know all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much
wrong in the stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and
my brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things
always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without vain
glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how they are
wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who is certain to
return some day, and that, too, not long hence. Nay, he will be here soon; may
heaven send you home quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day of
his coming, for once he is here the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly.”




With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put the
gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious and bowing
his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did not escape destruction, for
Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand of Telemachus. So he took his seat
again at the place from which he had come.




Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the suitors,
that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win still further
honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking laugh and said,
“Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to show myself to the
suitors although I detest them. I should like also to give my son a hint that
he had better not have anything more to do with them. They speak fairly enough
but they mean mischief.”




“My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go and
tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your face. Do not go
about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not right that you should
grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you always prayed that you might
live to see with a beard, is already grown up.”




“I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well, but do not try and
persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me of all my beauty
on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell Autonoe and Hippodamia that I
want them. They must be with me when I am in the cloister; I am not going among
the men alone; it would not be proper for me to do so.”




On this the old woman [150] went out of the room to bid the
maids go to their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another
matter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her
couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed grace and
beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She washed her face
with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes dancing with the
Graces; she made her taller and of a more commanding figure, while as for her
complexion it was whiter than sawn ivory. When Minerva had done all this she
went away, whereon the maids came in from the women’s room and woke Penelope
with the sound of their talking.




“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she, as she
passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. I wish Diana would
let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might no longer waste in
despair for the loss of my dear husband, who possessed every kind of good
quality and was the most distinguished man among the Achaeans.”




With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but attended by
two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the
bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her
face, and with a staid maid servant on either side of her. As they beheld her
the suitors were so overpowered and became so desperately enamoured of her,
that each one prayed he might win her for his own bed fellow.




“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you are no longer so
discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger you had a
greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown up, though a
stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well to do father as
far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means what it should be.
What is all this disturbance that has been going on, and how came you to allow
a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated? What would have happened if he
had suffered serious injury while a suppliant in our house? Surely this would
have been very discreditable to you.”




“I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied Telemachus,
“I understand all about it and know when things are not as they should be,
which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot, however, behave with perfect
propriety at all times. First one and then another of these wicked people here
keeps driving me out of my mind, and I have no one to stand by me. After all,
however, this fight between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the
suitors meant it to do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers of
yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all be as limp
as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See how he nods his head
like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that he cannot stand on his
feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for he has no strength
left in him.”




Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, “Queen Penelope,
daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could see you at this
moment, you would have still more suitors in your house by tomorrow morning,
for you are the most admirable woman in the whole world both as regards
personal beauty and strength of understanding.”




To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beauty
whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear
husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs, I should
both be more respected and show a better presence to the world. As it is, I am
oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap
upon me. My husband foresaw it all, and when he was leaving home he took my
right wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’ he said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home
from Troy, for the Trojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are
excellent also at fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a
fight sooner than this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back
to you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do you
look after things here. Take care of my father and mother as at present, and
even more so during my absence, but when you see our son growing a beard, then
marry whom you will, and leave this your present home.’ This is what he said
and now it is all coming true. A night will come when I shall have to yield
myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jove has taken from me all hope of
happiness. This further grief, moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors
are not wooing me after the custom of my country. When men are courting a woman
who they think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when
they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen and sheep
to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her magnificent presents,
instead of eating up other people’s property without paying for it.”




This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying to get
presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words which he knew
she did not mean.




Then Antinous said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many presents
as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not well to refuse
a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir from where we are,
till you have married the best man among us whoever he may be.”




The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his servant to
bring his present. Antinous’s man returned with a large and lovely dress most
exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully made brooch pins of pure
gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus immediately brought her a magnificent
chain of gold and amber beads that gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas’s two men
returned with some earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which
glistened most beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a
necklace of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful
present of some kind.




Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought the
presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing, and
stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it grew dark; they then
brought in three braziers [151] to give light, and piled them up
with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit torches from them, which
the maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses said:




“Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queen inside
the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool. I will hold the
light for all these people. They may stay till morning, but shall not beat me,
for I can stand a great deal.”




The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began to
gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but had been brought up
by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and looked after her when
she was a child; but in spite of all this she showed no consideration for the
sorrows of her mistress, and used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with
whom she was in love.




“Poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind? Go and sleep in
some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering here. Are you
not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—so many of them too? Has
the wine been getting into your head, or do you always babble in this way? You
seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus; take care that a
better man than he does not come and cudgel you about the head till he pack you
bleeding out of the house.”




“Vixen,” replied Ulysses, scowling at her, “I will go and tell Telemachus what
you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb from limb.”




With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body of the
house. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as he said. But
Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up torches and
looking at the people—brooding the while on things that should surely come to
pass.




But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their insolence, for
she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against them; she therefore set
Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him, which made the others laugh.
“Listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even
as I am minded. It is not for nothing that this man has come to the house of
Ulysses; I believe the light has not been coming from the torches, but from his
own head—for his hair is all gone, every bit of it.”




Then turning to Ulysses he said, “Stranger, will you work as a servant, if I
send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you build a stone
fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year round, and will find
you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not you; for you have got into
bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill your belly by going
round the country begging.”




“Eurymachus,” answered Ulysses, “if you and I were to work one against the
other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give me a good scythe,
and take another yourself, and let us see which will last the longer or mow the
stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing grass is about. Or if you will
plough against me, let us each take a yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of
great strength and endurance: turn me into a four acre field, and see whether
you or I can drive the straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this
day, give me a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my
temples—you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your gibes
about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a great man
because you live in a little world, and that a bad one. If Ulysses comes to his
own again, the doors of his house are wide, but you will find them narrow when
you try to fly through them.”




Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, “You wretch, I
will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and in public too.
Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always babble in this way?
You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus.” With this he
caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses sought protection at the knees of
Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid. The stool hit the cupbearer on his
right hand and knocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and
his wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. The suitors in the covered cloister
were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, “I
wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad luck to him, for all the trouble
he gives us. We cannot permit such disturbance about a beggar; if such ill
counsels are to prevail we shall have no more pleasure at our banquet.”




On this Telemachus came forward and said, “Sirs, are you mad? Can you not carry
your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has possessed you. I do
not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had your suppers, and the
sooner you all go home to bed the better.”




The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; but
Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, “Do not let us take
offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer. Neither let us do violence
to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses’ servants. Let the cupbearer go round
with the drink-offerings, that we may make them and go home to our rest. As for
the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house
that he has come.”




Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of Dulichium,
servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water and handed it round
to each of them man by man, whereon they made their drink-offerings to the
blessed gods: Then, when they had made their drink-offerings and had drunk each
one as he was minded, they took their several ways each of them to his own
abode.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 19 ===

TELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR—ULYSSES INTERVIEWS PENELOPE—EURYCLEA
WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HIS LEG—PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO
ULYSSES.




Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with Minerva’s
help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said to Telemachus,
“Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it down inside. Make some
excuse when the suitors ask you why you have removed it. Say that you have
taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it
was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add
to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel
over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace
both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use
them.”




Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse Euryclea
and said, “Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take the armour that
my father left behind him down into the store room. No one looks after it now
my father is gone, and it has got all smirched with soot during my own boyhood.
I want to take it down where the smoke cannot reach it.”




“I wish, child,” answered Euryclea, “that you would take the management of the
house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the property yourself.
But who is to go with you and light you to the store-room? The maids would have
done so, but you would not let them.”




“The stranger,” said Telemachus, “shall show me a light; when people eat my
bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from.”




Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room. Then
Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields, and spears
inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her hand that shed a
soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said, “Father, my eyes behold a
great marvel: the walls, with the rafters, crossbeams, and the supports on
which they rest are all aglow as with a flaming fire. Surely there is some god
here who has come down from heaven.”




“Hush,” answered Ulysses, “hold your peace and ask no questions, for this is
the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me here to talk with
your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief will ask me all sorts of
questions.”




On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner court, to
the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed till morning, while
Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the means whereby with Minerva’s
help he might be able to kill the suitors.




Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and they set
her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the fire in her
accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a footstool all in one
piece with the seat itself; and it was covered with a thick fleece: on this she
now sat, and the maids came from the women’s room to join her. They set about
removing the tables at which the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away
the bread that was left, with the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied
the embers out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both
light and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said,
“Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all night and
spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat your supper there,
or you shall be driven out with a firebrand.”




Ulysses scowled at her and answered, “My good woman, why should you be so angry
with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all in rags, and
because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner of tramps and beggars
generally? I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those
days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor
what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other things which
people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to
take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that
pride and place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest
you get out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come home,
for there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though he be dead as
you think he is, yet by Apollo’s will he has left a son behind him, Telemachus,
who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house, for he is now no
longer in his boyhood.”




Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, “Impudent baggage,”
said she, “I see how abominably you are behaving, and you shall smart for it.
You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that I was going to see the
stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose sake I am in such continual
sorrow.”




Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, “Bring a seat with a fleece
upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story, and listens to
what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions.”




Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon as
Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, “Stranger, I shall first ask you
who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and parents.”




“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dare to
chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you are like
some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch over a great and
valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley, the trees are loaded
with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea abounds with fish by reason
of his virtues, and his people do good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit
here in your house, ask me some other question and do not seek to know my race
and family, or you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow.
I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another
person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually. I shall have
one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes
swim with tears because I am heavy with wine.”




Then Penelope answered, “Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty, whether of
face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear husband with
them. If he were to return and look after my affairs I should be both more
respected and should show a better presence to the world. As it is, I am
oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap
upon me. The chiefs from all our islands—Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as
also from Ithaca itself, are wooing me against my will and are wasting my
estate. I can therefore show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to
people who say that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time
broken-hearted about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have
to invent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven put it
in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin working
upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them, ‘Sweethearts,
Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately;
wait—for I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have
finished making a pall for the hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when
death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if
he is laid out without a pall.’ This was what I said, and they assented;
whereon I used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I
would unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for
three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was now in
my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been accomplished,
those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to the suitors, who broke
in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with me, so I was forced to
finish my work whether I would or no. And now I do not see how I can find any
further shift for getting out of this marriage. My parents are putting great
pressure upon me, and my son chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon
his estate, for he is now old enough to understand all about it and is
perfectly able to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with
an excellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are
and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother of some sort;
you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock.”




Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in asking me
about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me: people must expect
to be pained when they have been exiles as long as I have, and suffered as much
among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as regards your question I will tell you
all you ask. There is a fair and fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it
is thickly peopled and there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many
different languages which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave
Eteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great
town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a conference
with Jove himself. [152] Minos was father to Deucalion,
whose son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus
sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my brother,
however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two; hence it was in
Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for the winds took him
there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out of his course from cape
Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours
are difficult to enter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds that
were then raging. As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked for
Idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already
set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my own
house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance of
everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from the
public store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice to
their heart’s content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there was a gale
blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one’s feet on land.
I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day
the wind dropped, and they got away.”




Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept as she
listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the mountain tops
when the winds from South East and West have breathed upon it and thawed it
till the rivers run bank full with water, even so did her cheeks overflow with
tears for the husband who was all the time sitting by her side. Ulysses felt
for her and was sorry for her, but he kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron
without letting them so much as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears.
Then, when she had relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and
said: “Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you
really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me, then,
how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so also with his
companions.”




“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “it is such a long time ago that I can hardly say.
Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and went elsewhither; but
I will tell you as well as I can recollect. Ulysses wore a mantle of purple
wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a gold brooch with two catches for
the pin. On the face of this there was a device that shewed a dog holding a
spotted fawn between his fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the
ground. Every one marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in
gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was
struggling convulsively to escape. [153] As for the shirt that he wore next
his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, and
glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld it.
Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not know whether
Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether one of his companions
had given them to him while he was on his voyage; or possibly some one at whose
house he was staying made him a present of them, for he was a man of many
friends and had few equals among the Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of
bronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down
to his feet, and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had
a servant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he was
like; his shoulders were hunched, [154] he was dark, and he had thick curly
hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater familiarity
than he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded with himself.”




Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable proofs that
Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief in tears she said
to him, “Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you, but henceforth you shall
be honoured and made welcome in my house. It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes
you speak of. I took them out of the store room and folded them up myself, and
I gave him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never
welcome him home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that
detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention.”




Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure yourself
further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can hardly blame you
for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and borne him children, would
naturally be grieved at losing him, even though he were a worse man than
Ulysses, who they say was like a god. Still, cease your tears and listen to
what I can tell you. I will hide nothing from you, and can say with perfect
truth that I have lately heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home;
he is among the Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that
he has begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were
lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the sun-god were
angry with him because his men had slaughtered the sun-god’s cattle, and they
were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuck to the keel of the ship and was
drifted on to the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals,
and who treated him as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and
wishing to escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here
long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering wealth;
for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no one can compare
with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all this, and he swore to
me—making drink-offerings in his house as he did so—that the ship was by the
water side and the crew found who would take Ulysses to his own country. He
sent me off first, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the
wheat-growing island of Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses
had got together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep
his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona
that he might learn Jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and know whether after
so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in secret. So you may
know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close at hand and cannot remain
away from home much longer; nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath,
and call Jove who is the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also
that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall
surely come to pass. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end
of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here.”




“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true you shall have
such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall congratulate
you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses will not return, neither will
you get your escort hence, for so surely as that Ulysses ever was, there are
now no longer any such masters in the house as he was, to receive honourable
strangers or to further them on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his
feet for him, and make him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may
be warm and quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him
again, that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. It
shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil to him;
like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. For how, sir, shall
you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to others of my sex both in
goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in my cloisters squalid
and ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if they are hard, and deal
hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are alive, and speak
contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that is righteous and deals
righteously, the people tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call
him blessed.”




Ulysses answered, “Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the day that
I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will lie as I have lain
on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night have I passed in any
rough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor, again, do I like having my
feet washed; I shall not let any of the young hussies about your house touch my
feet; but, if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as
much trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them.”




To this Penelope said, “My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet came to my
house there never was one who spoke in all things with such admirable propriety
as you do. There happens to be in the house a most respectable old woman—the
same who received my poor dear husband in her arms the night he was born, and
nursed him in infancy. She is very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet.”
“Come here,” said she, “Euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; I suppose
Ulysses’ hands and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages
all of us dreadfully fast.”




On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began to weep
and made lamentation saying, “My dear child, I cannot think whatever I am to do
with you. I am certain no one was ever more god-fearing than yourself, and yet
Jove hates you. No one in the whole world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor
gave him finer hecatombs when you prayed you might come to a green old age
yourself and see your son grow up to take after you: yet see how he has
prevented you alone from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt
the women in some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as
all these sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your not
choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have insulted you;
I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope has said that I am to
do so; I will wash them both for Penelope’s sake and for your own, for you have
raised the most lively feelings of compassion in my mind; and let me say this
moreover, which pray attend to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress
come here before now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was
so like Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”




“Those who have seen us both,” answered Ulysses, “have always said we were
wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.”




Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his feet,
and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath was warm
enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away from the light,
for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold of his leg she would
recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon the whole truth would come out.
And indeed as soon as she began washing her master, she at once knew the scar
as one that had been given him by a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt.
Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolycus—who was the most
accomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world—and with the sons of
Autolycus. Mercury himself had endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn
the thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his
companionship. It happened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found
the child of his daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set
the infant upon his knees and said, “Autolycus, you must find a name for your
grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”




“Son-in-law and daughter,” replied Autolycus, “call the child thus: I am highly
displeased with a large number of people in one place and another, both men and
women; so name the child ‘Ulysses,’ or the child of anger. When he grows up and
comes to visit his mother’s family on Mt. Parnassus, where my possessions lie,
I will make him a present and will send him on his way rejoicing.”




Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from Autolycus, who
with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome. His grandmother
Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both his beautiful
eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get dinner ready, and they did as he
told them. They brought in a five year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and
divided it into joints; these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces
and spitted them; they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round.
Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and
every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set
and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.




When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of Autolycus
went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too. They climbed the
wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy upland valleys; but as
the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh-risen from the slow still
currents of Oceanus, they came to a mountain dell. The dogs were in front
searching for the tracks of the beast they were chasing, and after them came
the sons of Autolycus, among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he
had a long spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick
brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor could
the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick with fallen
leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the hounds baying on
every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he rushed from his lair, raised
the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with fire flashing from his eyes.
Ulysses was the first to raise his spear and try to drive it into the brute,
but the boar was too quick for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above
the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for
the boar, Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear
went right through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life
went out of him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass of
the boar, and bound Ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the
bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and his sons
had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid presents, and sent
him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When he got back, his father and
mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had
hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when
he was out hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.




As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well hold of
it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The leg fell into the bath,
which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water was spilt on the
ground; Euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her grief filled with tears, and
she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses by the beard and said, “My dear
child, I am sure you must be Ulysses himself, only I did not know you till I
had actually touched and handled you.”




As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her that
her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to look in that
direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had diverted her
attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with his right hand and
with his left drew her close to him, and said, “Nurse, do you wish to be the
ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own breast, now that after twenty years
of wandering I am at last come to my own home again? Since it has been borne in
upon you by heaven to recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word
about it to any one else in the house, for if you do I tell you—and it shall
surely be—that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will
not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other women.”




“My child,” answered Euryclea, “what are you talking about? You know very well
that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my tongue like a stone or
a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay my saying to your heart, when
heaven has delivered the suitors into your hand, I will give you a list of the
women in the house who have been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.”




And Ulysses answered, “Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am well
able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your tongue and
leave everything to heaven.”




As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for the
first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed him with
oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself, and hid the scar
under his rags. Then Penelope began talking to him and said:




“Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter. It is
indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep in spite of sorrow.
As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe, that even
by day when I am attending to my duties and looking after the servants, I am
still weeping and lamenting during the whole time; then, when night comes, and
we all of us go to bed, I lie awake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to
the most incessant and cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of
Pandareus, sings in the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and
with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in its
uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard my
substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard to public
opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is not now time for me
to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing me and making me such
magnificent presents. As long as my son was still young, and unable to
understand, he would not hear of my leaving my husband’s house, but now that he
is full grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the way in which
the suitors are eating up his property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have
had and interpret it for me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house
that eat mash out of a trough, [155] and of which I am exceedingly fond.
I dreamed that a great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his
curved beak into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all.
Presently he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so piteously
was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he came back again,
and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and told me
to leave off crying. ‘Be of good courage,’ he said, ‘daughter of Icarius; this
is no dream, but a vision of good omen that shall surely come to pass. The
geese are the suitors, and I am no longer an eagle, but your own husband, who
am come back to you, and who will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.’ On
this I woke, and when I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their
mash as usual.”




“This dream, Madam,” replied Ulysses, “can admit but of one interpretation, for
had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled? The death of the
suitors is portended, and not one single one of them will escape.”




And Penelope answered, “Stranger, dreams are very curious and unaccountable
things, and they do not by any means invariably come true. There are two gates
through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one is of horn, and the
other ivory. Those that come through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those
from the gate of horn mean something to those that see them. I do not think,
however, that my own dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son
should be most thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say—and lay
my saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened day that
is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold a tournament
of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court, one in front of
the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built; he would then go back
from them and shoot an arrow through the whole twelve. I shall make the suitors
try to do the same thing, and whichever of them can string the bow most easily,
and send his arrow through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit
this house of my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even
so, I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”




Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your
tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow, handle it
how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”




To this Penelope said, “As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to me, I
can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do permanently without
sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth a time for all things. I
will therefore go upstairs and recline upon that couch which I have never
ceased to flood with my tears from the day Ulysses set out for the city with a
hateful name.”




She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her maidens,
and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep
over her eyelids.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 20 ===

ULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP—PENELOPE’S PRAYER TO DIANA—THE TWO SIGNS FROM
HEAVEN—EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE—THE SUITORS DINE—CTESIPPUS THROWS AN OX’S
FOOT AT ULYSSES—THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND LEAVES THE HOUSE.




Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on the top of
which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten, and Eurynome [156] threw a cloak
over him after he had laid himself down. There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully
brooding upon the way in which he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the
women who had been in the habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the
house giggling and laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and
he doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there,
or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. His heart growled
within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her teeth when she
sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at the evil deeds that were
being done: but he beat his breast and said, “Heart, be still, you had worse
than this to bear on the day when the terrible Cyclops ate your brave
companions; yet you bore it in silence till your cunning got you safe out of
the cave, though you made sure of being killed.”




Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he tossed
about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hot fire,
doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he may get it cooked as
soon as possible, even so did he turn himself about from side to side, thinking
all the time how, single handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so large
a body of men as the wicked suitors. But by and by Minerva came down from
heaven in the likeness of a woman, and hovered over his head saying, “My poor
unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is
safe inside it, and so is your son who is just such a young man as any father
may be proud of.”




“Goddess,” answered Ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but I am in some
doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors single handed,
seeing what a number of them there always are. And there is this further
difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing that with Jove’s and
your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must ask you to consider where I
am to escape to from their avengers when it is all over.”




“For shame,” replied Minerva, “why, any one else would trust a worse ally than
myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less wise than I am. Am I
not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout in all your troubles? I
tell you plainly that even though there were fifty bands of men surrounding us
and eager to kill us, you should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive
them away with you. But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all
night, and you shall be out of your troubles before long.”




As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus.




While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that eased the
burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting up in her bed
began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping she prayed to Diana
saying, “Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an arrow into my heart
and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and bear me through paths of
darkness till it drop me into the mouths of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the
daughters of Pandareus. The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and
mother, for the gods killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took
care of them, and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them
to excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an
imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment;
but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting them
married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what not happen to
every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to become handmaids to
the dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide
me from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go
even beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only,
and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, no
matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long as
they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forget
good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams. This very
night methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he was
when he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no
dream, but the very truth itself.”




On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and it
puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by his side.
Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had lain, and set
them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock’s hide out into the
open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed, saying “Father Jove, since
you have seen fit to bring me over land and sea to my own home after all the
afflictions you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of the mouth of some one
or other of those who are now waking within the house, and let me have another
sign of some kind from outside.”




Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up among
the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when he heard
it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from hard by in the mill
room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign. There were twelve
miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and barley which are the
staff of life. The others had ground their task and had gone to take their
rest, but this one had not yet finished, for she was not so strong as they
were, and when she heard the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to
her master. “Father Jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you
have thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this
means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor servant
who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the suitors dine in
the house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labour of grinding meal for
them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhere at all.”




Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’s speech,
and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avenge himself on the
suitors.




Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about his
shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a doughty spear
with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold of the cloister
and said to Euryclea, “Nurse, did you make the stranger comfortable both as
regards bed and board, or did you let him shift for himself?—for my mother,
good woman though she is, has a way of paying great attention to second-rate
people, and of neglecting others who are in reality much better men.”




“Do not find fault child,” said Euryclea, “when there is no one to find fault
with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked: your mother did
ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he would not. When he
wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one for him, but he said he
was such a wretched outcast that he would not sleep on a bed and under
blankets; he insisted on having an undressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins
put for him in the cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself.” [157] 




Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans were
meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not alone, for
his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids and said, “Come, wake
up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling them with water to lay the
dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a
wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the
fountain at once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early,
for it is a feast day.”




Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them went to
the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to work about the
house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors also came up and began
chopping firewood. By and by the women returned from the fountain, and the
swineherd came after them with the three best pigs he could pick out. These he
let feed about the premises, and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses,
“Stranger, are the suitors treating you any better now, or are they as insolent
as ever?”




“May heaven,” answered Ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness with which they
deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any sense of shame.”




Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for he too
was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he had two
shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse, and then
Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. “Are you still here, stranger,” said he,
“to pester people by begging about the house? Why can you not go elsewhere? You
and I shall not come to an understanding before we have given each other a
taste of our fists. You beg without any sense of decency: are there not feasts
elsewhere among the Achaeans, as well as here?”




Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third man,
Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and some goats.
These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take people over when
any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his heifer and his goats secure under
the gatehouse, and then went up to the swineherd. “Who, Swineherd,” said he,
“is this stranger that is lately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his
family? Where does he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some
great man, but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so
pleases them.”




As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand; “Good
day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very poorly off now, but
I hope you will have better times by and by. Father Jove, of all gods you are
the most malicious. We are your own children, yet you show us no mercy in all
our misery and afflictions. A sweat came over me when I saw this man, and my
eyes filled with tears, for he reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about
in just such rags as this man’s are, if indeed he is still among the living. If
he is already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master,
who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephallenians, and
now his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with them than I
have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless I have to keep
bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed to his son though he is in
the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide
Ulysses’ property among them because he has been away so long. I have often
thought—only it would not be right while his son is living—of going off with
the cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still harder to
stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. My position is
intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put myself under the
protection of some other chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet
return, and send all these suitors flying out of the house.”




“Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a very well-disposed person, and
I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will tell you, and will
confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief of all gods, and by that
hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses shall return before you leave
this place, and if you are so minded you shall see him killing the suitors who
are now masters here.” Penelope scrolled through a catalog of suitors on her tablet.




“If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should see how
I would do my very utmost to help him.”




And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.




Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to murder
Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—an eagle with a dove
in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, “My friends, this plot of ours to
murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to dinner instead.”




The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the benches
and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the heifer, and when the
inward meats were cooked they served them round. They mixed the wine in the
mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every man his cup, while Philoetius handed
round the bread in the bread baskets, and Melanthius poured them out their
wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.




Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that was
paved with stone; [158] he gave him a shabby looking seat
at a little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought
to him, with his wine in a gold cup. “Sit there,” said he, “and drink your wine
among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and blows of the
suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to Ulysses, and has passed
from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your hands and your tongues to
yourselves, or there will be mischief.”




The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; then
Antinous said, “We do not like such language but we will put up with it, for
Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove had let us we should have
put a stop to his brave talk ere now.”




Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the heralds were
bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the Achaeans gathered under
the shady grove of Apollo.




Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man his
portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at table gave
Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for Telemachus had told
them to do so.




But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their insolence, for
she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against them. Now there happened
to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ctesippus, and who came from
Same. This man, confident in his great wealth, was paying court to the wife of
Ulysses, and said to the suitors, “Hear what I have to say. The stranger has
already had as large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not
right nor reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I
will, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have something
to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses’ servants.”




As he spoke he picked up a heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which it lay,
and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little aside, and
avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion [159] as he did so, and it hit the wall,
not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to Ctesippus, “It is a good thing
for you,” said he, “that the stranger turned his head so that you missed him.
If you had hit him I should have run you through with my spear, and your father
would have had to see about getting you buried rather than married in this
house. So let me have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am
grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have long seen you
killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have put up with
this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further violence. Still,
if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die than see such
disgraceful scenes day after day—guests insulted, and men dragging the women
servants about the house in an unseemly way.”




They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, “No one
should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for it is quite
reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger, or any one else of
the servants who are about the house; I would say, however, a friendly word to
Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may commend itself to both. ‘As long,’
I would say, ‘as you had ground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come
home, no one could complain of your waiting and suffering [160] the suitors to
be in your house. It would have been better that he should have returned, but
it is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all this
quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man, and the one
who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will yourself be able to
manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink in peace, while your mother
will look after some other man’s house, not yours.’”




To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of my
unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering in
some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother’s marriage; on
the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and I will give her
numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist point blank that she
shall leave the house against her own wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do
this.”




Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set their wits
wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter. Their meat became
smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and their hearts were heavy
with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this and said, “Unhappy men, what is it that
ails you? There is a shroud of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your
cheeks are wet with tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and
roof-beams drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted out of
heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.”




Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus then said,
“This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses. Servants, turn him
out into the streets, since he finds it so dark here.”




But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me. I have
eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an understanding
mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for I see mischief
overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are insulting people and
plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be able to escape.”




He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him welcome,
but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking Telemachus by
laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to him, “Telemachus, you
are not happy in your guests; first you have this importunate tramp, who comes
begging bread and wine and has no skill for work or for hard fighting, but is
perfectly useless, and now here is another fellow who is setting himself up as
a prophet. Let me persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board
ship and send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring.”




Telemachus gave him no heed, but sat silently watching his father, expecting
every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.




Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat placed
for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear what every one
was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid much merriment; it had
been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed many victims; but the
supper was yet to come, and nothing can be conceived more gruesome than the
meal which a goddess and a brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had
brought their doom upon themselves.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 21 ===

THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS AND
PHILOETIUS




Minerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their skill with
the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves, as a means of
bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and got the store-room key,
which was made of bronze and had a handle of ivory; she then went with her
maidens into the store-room at the end of the house, where her husband’s
treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought iron were kept, and where was also his
bow, and the quiver full of deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend
whom he had met in Lacedaemon—Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with
one another in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in
order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had sailed away
with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these Ulysses took a long
journey while still quite young, for his father and the other chieftains sent
him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had gone there also to try and get
back twelve brood mares that he had lost, and the mule foals that were running
with them. These mares were the death of him in the end, for when he went to
the house of Jove’s son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of
valour, Hercules to his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he
feared not heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set
before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the mares
himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gave him the
bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on his death had
been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in return a sword and a spear,
and this was the beginning of a fast friendship, although they never visited at
one another’s houses, for Jove’s son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do
so. This bow, then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by
Ulysses when he sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home,
but had left it behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.




Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the carpenter
had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get it quite
straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the doors. She loosed
the strap from the handle of the door, put in the key, and drove it straight
home to shoot back the bolts that held the doors; [161] these flew open with a noise like a
bull bellowing in a meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform,
where the chests stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along
with fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case
from the peg on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees, weeping
bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relieved
her, she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and the
quiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it. Along with her came
her maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron and bronze which her
husband had won as prizes. When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of
the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before
her face, and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said:




“Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of this house
because its owner has been long absent, and without other pretext than that you
want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that you are contending for, I
will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it
most easily and send his arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I
follow and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in
wealth. But even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”




As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron before the
suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had bidden him. Hard by,
the stockman wept also when he saw his master’s bow, but Antinous scolded them.
“You country louts,” said he, “silly simpletons; why should you add to the
sorrows of your mistress by crying in this way? She has enough to grieve her in
the loss of her husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence,
or go outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors
shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it no light
matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of us all who is
such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember him, though I was
then only a child.”




This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to string
the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be the first that
should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses, whom he was dishonouring
in his own house—egging the others on to do so also.




Then Telemachus spoke. “Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jove must have robbed me
of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she will quit this
house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying myself as though there
were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the contest has been agreed upon, let
it go forward. It is for a woman whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos,
or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I
do; what need have I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no
excuses for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too
will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the iron, I
shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger, not if I can win
the prizes which my father won before me.”




As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him, and took
his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row, in a long groove
which he had dug for them, and had made straight by line. [162] Then he
stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was surprised when they saw
him set them up so orderly, though he had never seen anything of the kind
before. This done, he went on to the pavement to make trial of the bow; thrice
did he tug at it, trying with all his might to draw the string, and thrice he
had to leave off, though he had hoped to string the bow and shoot through the
iron. He was trying for the fourth time, and would have strung it had not
Ulysses made a sign to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:




“Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too young,
and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to hold my own if
any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are stronger than I, make trial
of the bow and get this contest settled.”




On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led into
the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow. Then he sat down
on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said:




“Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the place at
which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.”




The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He was
sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the mixing-bowl.
[163] He was the
only man who hated their evil deeds and was indignant with the others. He was
now the first to take the bow and arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make
his trial, but he could not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused
to hard work, they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, “My
friends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take the life
and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than to live
after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and which has
brought us so long together. Some one of us is even now hoping and praying that
he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow and tried it, let him woo
and make bridal offerings to some other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever
makes her the best offer and whose lot it is to win her.”




On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door, [164] with the arrow
standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seat again on the seat
from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him saying:




“Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and intolerable;
it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow take the life of many
a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend it yourself? True, you were
not born to be an archer, but there are others who will soon string it.”




Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, “Look sharp, light a fire in the
court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also a large
ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us warm the bow and grease
it—we will then make trial of it again, and bring the contest to an end.”




Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside it. He
also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the house, and the
suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but they were none of them
nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless there still remained Antinous
and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders among the suitors and much the
foremost among them all.




Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and Ulysses
followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the outer yard, Ulysses
said to them quietly:




“Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in doubt
whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of men would you
be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back here all of a sudden?
Say which you are disposed to do—to side with the suitors, or with Ulysses?”




“Father Jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might so ordain
it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see with what might
and main I would fight for him.”




In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return; when,
therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses said, “It is I,
Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at last, in the twentieth year,
I am come back to my own country. I find that you two alone of all my servants
are glad that I should do so, for I have not heard any of the others praying
for my return. To you two, therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be.
If heaven shall deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both
of you, will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now give you
convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is the scar
from the boar’s tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on Mt. Parnassus
with the sons of Autolycus.”




As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they had
examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw their arms
round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses kissed their hands
and faces in return. The sun would have gone down upon their mourning if
Ulysses had not checked them and said:




“Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and tell
those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both together; I
will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this moreover be the token
between us; the suitors will all of them try to prevent me from getting hold of
the bow and quiver; do you, therefore, Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you
are carrying it about, and tell the women to close the doors of their
apartment. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the
house, they must not come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at
their work. And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer
court, and to bind them securely at once.”




When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat that he
had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.




At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming it by
the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly grieved. He
heaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and for us all; I grieve that
I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care nearly so much about
this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel
most is the fact of our being so inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot
string his bow. This will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”




“It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and you know it yourself.
Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can string a bow on
such a day as this? Put it on one side—as for the axes they can stay where they
are, for no one is likely to come to the house and take them away: let the
cupbearer go round with his cups, that we may make our drink-offerings and drop
this matter of the bow; we will tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats
tomorrow—the best he has; we can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty
archer, and again make trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”




The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over the
hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water
and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering. Then, when they
had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he desired, Ulysses
craftily said:—




“Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am minded.
I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has just spoken
with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and leave the matter to the
gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory to whom it will. For the
moment, however, give me the bow that I may prove the power of my hands among
you all, and see whether I still have as much strength as I used to have, or
whether travel and neglect have made an end of it.”




This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,
Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, you have
not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to think yourself
lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your betters, without having any
smaller portion served you than we others have had, and in being allowed to
hear our conversation. No other beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear
what we say among ourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as
it does with all those who drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the
Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae. When
the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did ill deeds about the house
of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so they rushed
at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged him through the
doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his
crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth, therefore, there was war between
mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his own
drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly with you if
you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here, for we shall at
once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him: you
will never get away alive, so drink and keep quiet without getting into a
quarrel with men younger than yourself.”




Penelope then spoke to him. “Antinous,” said she, “it is not right that you
should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house. If the
stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of Ulysses, can
you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me his wife? Even the
man himself can have no such idea in his mind: none of you need let that
disturb his feasting; it would be out of all reason.”




“Queen Penelope,” answered Eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this man will
take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest some of the
baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go gossiping about and say,
‘These suitors are a feeble folk; they are paying court to the wife of a brave
man whose bow not one of them was able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who
came to the house strung it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ This
is what will be said, and it will be a scandal against us.”




“Eurymachus,” Penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up the estate of
a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect others to think
well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk as you think they will? This
stranger is strong and well-built, he says moreover that he is of noble birth.
Give him the bow, and let us see whether he can string it or no. I say—and it
shall surely be—that if Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will
give him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and
robbers, and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will see him sent
safely wherever he wants to go.”




Then Telemachus said, “Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in the
islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any one have the
bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the other, not even
though I choose to make the stranger a present of the bow outright, and let him
take it away with him. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your
daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants. This
bow is a man’s matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who am master
here.”




She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in her heart.
Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear
husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids.




The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but the
suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of them said,
“You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out of your wits? If
Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own boarhounds shall get
you into some quiet little place, and worry you to death.”




Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow down
then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other side of the
cloisters, and threatened him saying, “Father Eumaeus, bring the bow on in
spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with stones back to the
country, for I am the better man of the two. I wish I was as much stronger than
all the other suitors in the house as I am than you, I would soon send some of
them off sick and sorry, for they mean mischief.”




Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them in a
better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and placed it in
the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called Euryclea apart and said
to her, “Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to close the doors of the women’s
apartments. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the
house, they are not to come out, but are to keep quiet and stay where they are
at their work.”




Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’s apartments.




Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the outer
court. There was a ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the gatehouse, so he
made the gates fast with it and then came in again, resuming the seat that he
had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who had now got the bow in his hands,
and was turning it every way about, and proving it all over to see whether the
worms had been eating into its two horns during his absence. Then would one
turn towards his neighbour saying, “This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either
he has got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike
style does the old vagabond handle it.”




Another said, “I hope he may be no more successful in other things than he is
likely to be in stringing this bow.”




But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it as
easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes the twisted
gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand to prove the string,
and it sang sweetly under his touch like the twittering of a swallow. The
suitors were dismayed, and turned colour as they heard it; at that moment,
moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as
he heard the omen that the son of scheming Saturn had sent him.




He took an arrow that was lying upon the table [165] —for those which the Achaeans were
so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he laid it on the
centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow and the string toward
him, still seated on his seat. When he had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow
pierced every one of the handle-holes of the axes from the first onwards till
it had gone right through them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to
Telemachus:




“Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what I aimed at,
and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong, and not as the
suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for the Achaeans to
prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then otherwise to disport
themselves with song and dance which are the crowning ornaments of a banquet.”




As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on his
sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 22 ===

THE KILLING OF THE SUITORS—THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES ARE MADE
TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.




Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement with his
bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to the ground at his
feet and said, “The mighty contest is at an end. I will now see whether Apollo
will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which no man has yet hit.”




On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a
two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands. He had
no thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think that one man,
however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill him? The arrow struck
Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean through his neck, so that he
fell over and the cup dropped from his hand, while a thick stream of blood
gushed from his nostrils. He kicked the table from him and upset the things on
it, so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to
the ground. [166] 
The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit; they
sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked everywhere
towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear, and they rebuked
Ulysses very angrily. “Stranger,” said they, “you shall pay for shooting people
in this way: you shall see no other contest; you are a doomed man; he whom you
have slain was the foremost youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you
for having killed him.”




Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by mistake, and
did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of every one of them. But
Ulysses glared at them and said:




“Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have wasted my
substance, [167] 
have forced my women servants to lie with you, and have wooed my wife while I
was still living. You have feared neither God nor man, and now you shall die.”




They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about to see
whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke.




“If you are Ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just. We have done
much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous who was the head and
front of the offending lies low already. It was all his doing. It was not that
he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much care about that; what he wanted
was something quite different, and Jove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted
to kill your son and to be chief man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met
the death which was his due, spare the lives of your people. We will make
everything good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten
and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and we will
keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened. Until we have
done this no one can complain of your being enraged against us.”




Ulysses again glared at him and said, “Though you should give me all that you
have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, I will not stay my
hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must fight, or fly for your
lives; and fly, not a man of you shall.”




Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:




“My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he is and
shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then show fight;
draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from his arrows. Let us
have at him with a rush, to drive him from the pavement and doorway: we can
then get through into the town, and raise such an alarm as shall soon stay his
shooting.”




As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides, and with
a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot an arrow into his
breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself in his liver. He dropped
his sword and fell doubled up over his table. The cup and all the meats went
over on to the ground as he smote the earth with his forehead in the agonies of
death, and he kicked the stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in
darkness.




Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and get him
away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and struck him from
behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and went right through his
chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and struck the earth with his
forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from him, leaving his spear still in the
body, for he feared that if he stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans
might come up and hack at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off
at a run, and immediately was at his father’s side. Then he said:




“Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for your
temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for the
swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”




“Run and fetch them,” answered Ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, or when I am
alone they may get me away from the door.”




Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where the
armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass helmets
with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to his father, and armed
himself first, while the stockman and the swineherd also put on their armour,
and took their places near Ulysses. Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows
lasted, had been shooting the suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one
another: when his arrows gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wall
of the house by the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about his
shoulders; on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of
horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it, [168] and he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears.




Now there was a trap door [169] on the wall, while at one end of
the pavement [170] 
there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this exit was closed by a
well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by this door and guard it, for
only one person could attack it at a time. But Agelaus shouted out, “Cannot
some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what is going on? Help
would come at once, and we should soon make an end of this man and his
shooting.”




“This may not be, Agelaus,” answered Melanthius, “the mouth of the narrow
passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. One brave man
could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I will do, I will
bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is there that Ulysses and
his son have put them.”




On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room of
Ulysses’ house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets and spears,
and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to the suitors. Ulysses’
heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors [171] putting on their armour and
brandishing their spears. He saw the greatness of the danger, and said to
Telemachus, “Some one of the women inside is helping the suitors against us, or
it may be Melanthius.”




Telemachus answered, “The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left the
store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I have. Go,
Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the women who is doing
this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the son of Dolius.”




Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the store room
to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to Ulysses who was
beside him, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that scoundrel Melanthius,
just as we suspected, who is going to the store room. Say, shall I kill him, if
I can get the better of him, or shall I bring him here that you may take your
own revenge for all the many wrongs that he has done in your house?”




Ulysses answered, “Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, no matter
what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius’ hands and feet behind
him. Throw him into the store room and make the door fast behind you; then
fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up to the rafters from a
high bearing-post, [172] that he may linger on in an agony.”




Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the store
room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was busy searching
for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two took their stand on
either side of the door and waited. By and by Melanthius came out with a helmet
in one hand, and an old dry-rotted shield in the other, which had been borne by
Laertes when he was young, but which had been long since thrown aside, and the
straps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the
hair, and threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet well
behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had told
them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up from a high
pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did you then vaunt, O
swineherd Eumaeus saying, “Melanthius, you will pass the night on a soft bed as
you deserve. You will know very well when morning comes from the streams of
Oceanus, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats for the suitors to
feast on.”




There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on their
armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take their places by
the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the cloister, fierce and
full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the body of the court were still
both brave and many. Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having
assumed the voice and form of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her and
said, “Mentor, lend me your help, and forget not your old comrade, nor the many
good turns he has done you. Besides, you are my age-mate.”




But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the other
side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to reproach her.
“Mentor,” he cried, “do not let Ulysses beguile you into siding with him and
fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when we have killed these
people, father and son, we will kill you too. You shall pay for it with your
head, and when we have killed you, we will take all you have, in doors or out,
and bring it into hotch-pot with Ulysses’ property; we will not let your sons
live in your house, nor your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live
in the city of Ithaca.”




This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very angrily. [173] “Ulysses,”
said she, “your strength and prowess are no longer what they were when you
fought for nine long years among the Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You
killed many a man in those days, and it was through your stratagem that Priam’s
city was taken. How comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that
you are on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?
Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcimus
shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him.”




But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still further to
prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew up to one of the
rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in the form of a swallow.




Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon the
suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives they were
by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen under the arrows of
Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, “My friends, he will soon have to
leave off, for Mentor has gone away after having done nothing for him but brag.
They are standing at the doors unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but
six of you throw your spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with
glory by killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the
others.”




They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of no
effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the pointed shaft
of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had avoided all the spears of
the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, “My friends, I should say we too had
better let drive into the middle of them, or they will crown all the harm they
have done us by killing us outright.”




They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears. Ulysses
killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while the stockman
killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others drew back into a
corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained their spears by drawing
them from the bodies of the dead.




The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their weapons for
the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of the cloister; another
went against the door; while the pointed shaft of another struck the wall.
Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the top skin from off Telemachus’s
wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze Eumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but
the spear went on and fell to the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive
into the crowd of suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and
Eumaeus Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and
taunted him saying, “Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so foolish as
to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your speech, for the gods
are far stronger than men. I make you a present of this advice to repay you for
the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was begging about in his own house.”




Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a spear in
close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in the belly, and the
dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward full on his face upon the
ground. Then Minerva from her seat on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, and
the hearts of the suitors quailed. They fled to the other end of the court like
a herd of cattle maddened by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at
their longest. As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop
down on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,
for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the sport—even so did
Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite them on every side. They
made a horrible groaning as their brains were being battered in, and the ground
seethed with their blood.




Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, “Ulysses I beseech you have
mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women in your house
either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I saw them, but they
would not listen, and now they are paying for their folly. I was their
sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die without having done anything to
deserve it, and shall have got no thanks for all the good that I did.”




Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “If you were their sacrificing
priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be long before I got
home again, and that you might marry my wife and have children by her.
Therefore you shall die.”




With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when he was
being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he struck Leiodes on
the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he was
yet speaking.




The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes—he who had been forced by the suitors to
sing to them—now tried to save his life. He was standing near towards the trap
door, [174] and
held his lyre in his hand. He did not know whether to fly out of the cloister
and sit down by the altar of Jove that was in the outer court, and on which
both Laertes and Ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or
whether to go straight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he
deemed it best to embrace Ulysses’ knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground
between the mixing bowl [175] and the silver-studded seat; then
going up to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, “Ulysses, I beseech
you have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwards if you
kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I make all my lays
myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of inspiration. I would sing to
you as though you were a god, do not therefore be in such a hurry to cut my
head off. Your own son Telemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent
your house and sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many
and too strong for me, so they made me.”




Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “Hold!” he cried, “the
man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medon too, who was always
good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or Eumaeus has already killed
him, or he has fallen in your way when you were raging about the court.”




Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a seat
beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly flayed
heifer’s hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus, and laid hold
of his knees.




“Here I am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tell your
father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for having wasted
his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to yourself.”




Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “Fear not; Telemachus has saved your life,
that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly better good
deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside the cloisters into the
outer court, and be out of the way of the slaughter—you and the bard—while I
finish my work here inside.”




The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down by
Jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting that they
would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully over, to see
if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living, but he found them
all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood. They were like fishes which
fishermen have netted out of the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping
for water till the heat of the sun makes an end of them. Even so were the
suitors lying all huddled up one against the other.




Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, “Call nurse Euryclea; I have something to say
to her.”




Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “Make haste,” said
he, “you old woman who have been set over all the other women in the house.
Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.”




When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room and came
out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpses bespattered with
blood and filth like a lion that has just been devouring an ox, and his breast
and both his cheeks are all bloody, so that he is a fearful sight; even so was
Ulysses besmirched from head to foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses
and such a quantity of blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw
that a great deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, “Old woman,” said he,
“rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about it; it
is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven’s doom and their own evil
deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they respected no man in the
whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, and they have come to a
bad end as a punishment for their wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me
which of the women in the house have misconducted themselves, and who are
innocent.” [176] 




“I will tell you the truth, my son,” answered Euryclea. “There are fifty women
in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool, and all kinds of
household work. Of these, twelve in all [177] have misbehaved, and have been
wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope. They showed no disrespect to
Telemachus, for he has only lately grown and his mother never permitted him to
give orders to the female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife
all that has happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.”




“Do not wake her yet,” answered Ulysses, “but tell the women who have
misconducted themselves to come to me.”




Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to Ulysses; in
the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the swineherd. “Begin,”
said he, “to remove the dead, and make the women help you. Then, get sponges
and clean water to swill down the tables and seats. When you have thoroughly
cleansed the whole cloisters, take the women into the space between the domed
room and the wall of the outer court, and run them through with your swords
till they are quite dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in
which they used to lie in secret with the suitors.”




On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly. First they
carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one another in the
gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do their work quickly, so
they had to carry the bodies out. When they had done this, they cleaned all the
tables and seats with sponges and water, while Telemachus and the two others
shovelled up the blood and dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all
away and put it out of doors. Then when they had made the whole place quite
clean and orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space
between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could not
get away: and Telemachus said to the other two, “I shall not let these women
die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and used to
sleep with the suitors.”




So saying he made a ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the building,
at a good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch the ground; and as
thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been set for them in a thicket
just as they were getting to their nest, and a terrible fate awaits them, even
so did the women have to put their heads in nooses one after the other and die
most miserably. [178] Their feet moved convulsively for a
while, but not for very long.




As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner court.
There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his vitals and gave
them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut off his hands and his
feet.




When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back into the
house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old nurse Euryclea,
“Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and fetch fire also that I may
burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here
with her attendants, and also all the maidservants that are in the house.”




“All that you have said is true,” answered Euryclea, “but let me bring you some
clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags on your back any
longer. It is not right.”




“First light me a fire,” replied Ulysses.




She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses thoroughly
purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts. Then she went
inside to call the women and tell them what had happened; whereon they came
from their apartment with torches in their hands, and pressed round Ulysses to
embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and taking hold of his hands. It
made him feel as if he should like to weep, for he remembered every one of
them. [179]

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 23 ===

PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND—EARLY IN THE MORNING ULYSSES,
TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.




Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear husband
had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet were nimble for
joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her head to speak to her.
“Wake up Penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed, “and see with your own eyes
something that you have been wanting this long time past. Ulysses has at last
indeed come home again, and has killed the suitors who were giving so much
trouble in his house, eating up his estate and ill treating his son.”




“My good nurse,” answered Penelope, “you must be mad. The gods sometimes send
some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish people become
sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you; for you always used to
be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock me when I have trouble enough
already—talking such nonsense, and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had
taken possession of my eyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from
the day my poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back
again into the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up to
bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding.
As it is your age shall protect you.”




“My dear child,” answered Euryclea, “I am not mocking you. It is quite true as
I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger whom they all
kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus knew all the time that he
was come back, but kept his father’s secret that he might have his revenge on
all these wicked people.”




Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea, and wept
for joy. “But my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me; if he has really
come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the wicked suitors single
handed, seeing what a number of them there always were?”




“I was not there,” answered Euryclea, “and do not know; I only heard them
groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled up in a
corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, till your son came to fetch
me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses standing over the corpses
that were lying on the ground all round him, one on top of the other. You would
have enjoyed it if you could have seen him standing there all bespattered with
blood and filth, and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all
piled up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a
great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call you, so
come with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last the
desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home to find both
wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge in his own house on the
suitors who behaved so badly to him.”




“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “do not exult too confidently over all this.
You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come home—more
particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both of us; but what you
tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is angry with the suitors for
their great wickedness, and has made an end of them; for they respected no man
in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, and they have
come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away
from the Achaean land; he will never return home again.”




Then nurse Euryclea said, “My child, what are you talking about? but you were
all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is never
coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side at this very
moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was washing him I
perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I wanted to tell you about
it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth;
so come with me and I will make this bargain with you—if I am deceiving you,
you may have me killed by the most cruel death you can think of.”




“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardly fathom
the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of my son, that I
may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has killed them.”




On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she considered
whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and question him, or
whether she should at once go up to him and embrace him. When, however, she had
crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she sat down opposite Ulysses by the
fire, against the wall at right angles [180] [to that by which she had entered],
while Ulysses sat near one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and
waiting to see what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a
long time she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked
him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby
clothes and failed to recognise him, [181] till Telemachus began to reproach
her and said:




“Mother—but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name—why do you
keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his side and begin
talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman could bear to keep away
from her husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence,
and after having gone through so much; but your heart always was as hard as a
stone.”




Penelope answered, “My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find no
words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot even look
him straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses come back to his own
home again, we shall get to understand one another better by and by, for there
are tokens with which we two are alone acquainted, and which are hidden from
all others.”




Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, “Let your mother put me to any
proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently. She rejects me
for the moment and believes me to be somebody else, because I am covered with
dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us, however, consider what we had better
do next. When one man has killed another—even though he was not one who would
leave many friends to take up his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still
say good bye to his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing
the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you
consider this matter.”




“Look to it yourself, father,” answered Telemachus, “for they say you are the
wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other mortal man who can
compare with you. We will follow you with right good will, nor shall you find
us fail you in so far as our strength holds out.”




“I will say what I think will be best,” answered Ulysses. “First wash and put
your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and dress; Phemius
shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if people outside hear,
or any of the neighbours, or some one going along the street happens to notice
it, they may think there is a wedding in the house, and no rumours about the
death of the suitors will get about in the town, before we can escape to the
woods upon my own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”




Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed and put
their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took his lyre and set
them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The house re-echoed with the
sound of men and women dancing, and the people outside said, “I suppose the
queen has been getting married at last. She ought to be ashamed of herself for
not continuing to protect her husband’s property until he comes home.” [182] 




This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been
happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his own
house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look taller and
stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head,
and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head
and shoulders just as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under
Vulcan or Minerva—and his work is full of beauty—enriches a piece of silver
plate by gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals,
and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. “My dear,” said he,
“heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had.
No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back
to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much.
But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone, for this woman has
a heart as hard as iron.”




“My dear,” answered Penelope, “I have no wish to set myself up, nor to
depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well
remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he himself
built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it with fleeces,
good coverlets, and blankets.”




She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, “Wife, I am much
displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been taking my bed from
the place in which I left it? He must have found it a hard task, no matter how
skilled a workman he was, unless some god came and helped him to shift it.
There is no man living, however strong and in his prime, who could move it from
its place, for it is a marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own
hands. There was a young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in
full vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this
with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors
strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and
left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and then
worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully, straightening my work by
drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop. I then bored a hole
down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till
I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched a
hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you see I know all
about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether any one
has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its roots.”




When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke down. She
flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and kissed him. “Do
not be angry with me Ulysses,” she cried, “you, who are the wisest of mankind.
We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied us the happiness of spending
our youth, and of growing old, together; do not then be aggrieved or take it
amiss that I did not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you. I have been
shuddering all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive
me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked people going about.
Jove’s daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign
country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and
bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought
to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now, however, that
you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our bed (which no
human being has ever seen but you and I and a single maidservant, the daughter
of Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who keeps the doors
of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrust no longer.”




Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and faithful
wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who are swimming
towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with the fury of his
winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these, covered with brine, are
thankful when they find themselves on firm ground and out of danger—even so was
her husband welcome to her as she looked upon him, and she could not tear her
two fair arms from about his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging
their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined
otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn
to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear her
onward to break the day upon mankind.




At last, however, Ulysses said, “Wife, we have not yet reached the end of our
troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It is long and
difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade of Teiresias
prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into Hades to ask about
my return and that of my companions. But now let us go to bed, that we may lie
down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”




“You shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied Penelope, “now that the
gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country. But as
heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the task that lies
before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it is better that I should
be told at once.”




“My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tell you? Still, I
will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I do not like it
myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying an oar, till I came
to a country where the people have never heard of the sea, and do not even mix
salt with their food. They know nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the
wings of a ship. He gave me this certain token which I will not hide from you.
He said that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing
shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground
and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go
home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for
myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my life
should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and my
people should bless me. All this, he said, should surely come to pass.”




And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier time in
your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from misfortune.”




Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches and made
the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid them, the nurse
went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the bed chamber woman
Eurynome [183] to
show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by torch light. When she had conducted them to
their room she went back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own
old bed. Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in the
cloisters.




When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking with one
another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing the house filled
with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many sheep and oxen on her
account, and had drunk so many casks of wine. Ulysses in his turn told her what
he had suffered, and how much trouble he had himself given to other people. He
told her everything, and she was so delighted to listen that she never went to
sleep till he had ended his whole story.




He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the
fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops and how he
had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave comrades; how he then
went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and furthered him on his way,
but even so he was not to reach home, for to his great grief a hurricane
carried him out to sea again; how he went on to the Laestrygonian city
Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his ships with their crews, save
himself and his own ship only. Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and
how he sailed to the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban
prophet Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who
bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous
singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible
Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men
then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the ship with
his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together, himself alone being
left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso,
who kept him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in
which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old,
but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering
he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had
been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given
him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing about
which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the
burden of his sorrows.




Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that Ulysses had
had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned Dawn rise out of
Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On this, Ulysses rose from his
comfortable bed and said to Penelope, “Wife, we have both of us had our full
share of troubles, you, here, in lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented
from getting home though I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however,
that we have at last come together, take care of the property that is in the
house. As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will
take many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to
make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now going to
the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has so long been
grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these instructions, though
you have little need of them. At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have
been killing the suitors; go upstairs, therefore, [184] and stay there with your women. See
nobody and ask no questions.” [185] 




As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius, and
Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also. This they did, and
armed themselves. When they had done so, they opened the gates and sallied
forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now daylight, but Minerva nevertheless
concealed them in darkness and led them quickly out of the town.

=== ODYSSEY BOOK 24 ===

THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE OF
LAERTES—THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA CONCLUDES
A PEACE.




Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his hand he
held the fair golden wand with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them
just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts and led them, while they
followed whining and gibbering behind him. As bats fly squealing in the hollow
of some great cave, when one of them has fallen out of the cluster in which
they hang, even so did the ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of
sorrow led them down into the dark abode of death. When they had passed the
waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and
the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the
souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.




Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of Patroclus,
Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man of all the Danaans
after the son of Peleus himself.




They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of Agamemnon
joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also the ghosts of
those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus; and the ghost of
Achilles spoke first.




“Son of Atreus,” it said, “we used to say that Jove had loved you better from
first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many and brave
men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the hand of death,
which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too early. Better for you had
you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your renown, for the Achaeans would have
built a mound over your ashes, and your son would have been heir to your good
name, whereas it has now been your lot to come to a most miserable end.”




“Happy son of Peleus,” answered the ghost of Agamemnon, “for having died at
Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the Achaeans fell
round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the whirling clouds of dust,
all huge and hugely, heedless now of your chivalry. We fought the whole of the
livelong day, nor should we ever have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane
to stay us. Then, when we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid
you on your bed and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments.
The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother,
when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the
sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans quaked
for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had not wise old
Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying, ‘Hold, Argives, fly
not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming from the sea with her
immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.’




“Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the old man
of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in immortal
raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet voices in
lament—calling and answering one another; there was not an Argive but wept for
pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights seven and ten we mourned you,
mortals and immortals, but on the eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and
many a fat sheep with many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were
burnt in raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,
horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with
the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven had done their
work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in ointments and
in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold them—gift of
Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled your bleached bones
with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and separate we enclosed also
those of Antilochus, who had been closer to you than any other of your comrades
now that Patroclus was no more.




“Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point jutting out
over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far out upon the sea by
those now living and by them that shall be born hereafter. Your mother begged
prizes from the gods, and offered them to be contended for by the noblest of
the Achaeans. You must have been present at the funeral of many a hero, when
the young men gird themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death
of some great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death your
fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore among all
mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my fighting were
done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the hands of Aegisthus
and those of my wicked wife.”




Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the ghosts
of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of Agamemnon and
Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to them at once. The ghost
of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had
been his host, so it began to talk to him.




“Amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—all of an
age too—that you are come down here under the ground? One could pick no finer
body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you
when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the mainland
when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of
their wives and city? Answer my question, for I have been your guest. Do you
not remember how I came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to
join us with his ships against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume
our voyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us.”




And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, “Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of men, I
remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully and accurately
about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses had been long gone,
and we were courting his wife, who did not say point blank that she would not
marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she meant to compass our
destruction: this, then, was the trick she played us. She set up a great
tambour frame in her room and began to work on an enormous piece of fine
needlework. ‘Sweethearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not
press me to marry again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in
needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes,
against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of
the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ This is what she said,
and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great web all day
long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight. She
fooled us in this way for three years without our finding it out, but as time
wore on and she was now in her fourth year, in the waning of moons and many
days had been accomplished, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told
us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it
whether she would or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after
she had had it washed, [186] its splendour was as that of the
sun or moon.




“Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his
swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from a voyage
to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched their plot for our
destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after him, accompanied by the
swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and leaning on a staff as though he were
some miserable old beggar. He came so unexpectedly that none of us knew him,
not even the older ones among us, and we reviled him and threw things at him.
He endured both being struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his
own house; but when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and
Telemachus took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors
behind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity of
iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the beginning of
our end, for not one of us could string the bow—nor nearly do so. When it was
about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us shouted out that it should
not be given him, no matter what he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his
having it. When he had got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent his
arrow through the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured
his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed Antinous,
and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell
thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods was helping them,
for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the cloisters, and there
was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains were being battered in, and the
ground seethed with our blood. This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and
our bodies are lying still uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends
at home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and
wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the
offices due to the departed.”




“Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes,” replied the ghost of Agamemnon, “you are
indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare excellence of
understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as Penelope the daughter of
Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue shall never die, and the immortals
shall compose a song that shall be welcome to all mankind in honour of the
constancy of Penelope. How far otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of
Tyndareus who killed her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men,
for she has brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.”




Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels of the
earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town and soon reached
the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he had reclaimed with infinite
labour. Here was his house, with a lean-to running all round it, where the
slaves who worked for him slept and sat and ate, while inside the house there
was an old Sicel woman, who looked after him in this his country-farm. When
Ulysses got there, he said to his son and to the other two:




“Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner. Meanwhile
I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to recognise me after so
long an absence.”




He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who went
straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to make trial
of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did not see Dolius,
nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they were all gathering
thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place where the old man had
told them; he therefore found his father alone, hoeing a vine. He had on a
dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs
of oxhide to save him from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather;
he had a goat skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When
Ulysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall
pear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and
tell him all about his having come home, or whether he should first question
him and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty with
him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down and digging
about a plant.




“I see, sir,” said Ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—what pains you
take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a fig tree, vine,
olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your attention. I trust,
however, that you will not be offended if I say that you take better care of
your garden than of yourself. You are old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It
cannot be because you are idle that your master takes such poor care of you,
indeed your face and figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim
you of noble birth. I should have said that you were one of those who should
wash well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but
tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you
working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this place that I have come to
really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a dull fellow, and
had not the patience to hear my story out when I was asking him about an old
friend of mine, whether he was still living, or was already dead and in the
house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you that this man came to my house once
when I was in my own country and never yet did any stranger come to me whom I
liked better. He said that his family came from Ithaca and that his father was
Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all
the abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary
presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid silver with
flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks, and as many pieces of
tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve
fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. To all this I added four good
looking women skilled in all useful arts, and I let him take his choice.”




His father shed tears and answered, “Sir, you have indeed come to the country
that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked people. All this
wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If you could have found your
friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have entertained you hospitably and would
have requited your presents amply when you left him—as would have been only
right considering what you had already given him. But tell me, and tell me
true, how many years is it since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as
ever was? Alas! He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea
have eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents, could
throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could his excellent
and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was natural upon his
death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices due to the departed. But
now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who and whence are you—tell me of your
town and parents? Where is the ship lying that has brought you and your men to
Ithaca? Or were you a passenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought
you here have gone on their way and left you?”




“I will tell you everything,” answered Ulysses, “quite truly. I come from
Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who is the son of
Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my course as I was
leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against my will. As for my ship
it is lying over yonder, off the open country outside the town, and this is the
fifth year since Ulysses left my country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good
for him when he left me. The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and
I rejoiced to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have
another friendly meeting and exchange presents.”




A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both hands
with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey head, groaning
heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched, and his nostrils
quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang towards him, flung his
arms about him and kissed him, saying, “I am he, father, about whom you are
asking—I have returned after having been away for twenty years. But cease your
sighing and lamentation—we have no time to lose, for I should tell you that I
have been killing the suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence
and crimes.”




“If you really are my son Ulysses,” replied Laertes, “and have come back again,
you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall convince me.”




“First observe this scar,” answered Ulysses, “which I got from a boar’s tusk
when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me to
Autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when he was over
here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out to you the trees
in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all about them as I followed
you round the garden. We went over them all, and you told me their names and
what they all were. You gave me thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty
fig trees; you also said you would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn
planted between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of
heaven has been laid heavy upon them.”




Laertes’ strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which his son
had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to support him, or
he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he came to, and was
beginning to recover his senses, he said, “O father Jove, then you gods are
still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have really been punished for their
insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I am much afraid that I shall have all the
townspeople of Ithaca up here directly, and they will be sending messengers
everywhere throughout the cities of the Cephallenians.”




Ulysses answered, “Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that, but let
us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told Telemachus,
Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready as soon as
possible.”




Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got there
they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting up meat and
mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took Laertes inside and washed
him and anointed him with oil. She put him on a good cloak, and Minerva came up
to him and gave him a more imposing presence, making him taller and stouter
than before. When he came back his son was surprised to see him looking so like
an immortal, and said to him, “My dear father, some one of the gods has been
making you much taller and better-looking.”




Laertes answered, “Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were the
man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took Nericum, that strong
fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I then was and had been in our
house yesterday with my armour on, I should have been able to stand by you and
help you against the suitors. I should have killed a great many of them, and
you would have rejoiced to see it.”




Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their work and
the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper place on the
benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old Dolius and his sons
left their work and came up, for their mother, the Sicel woman who looked after
Laertes now that he was growing old, had been to fetch them. When they saw
Ulysses and were certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but
Ulysses scolded them good naturedly and said, “Sit down to your dinner, old
man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some
time and have been waiting for you.”




Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. “Sir,” said he,
seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we have long been
wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we had given up
hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you. [187] But tell me,
does Penelope already know of your return, or shall we send some one to tell
her?”




“Old man,” answered Ulysses, “she knows already, so you need not trouble about
that.” On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered round Ulysses
to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other; then they took their
seats in due order near Dolius their father.




While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round the
town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the suitors; as
soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered from every quarter,
groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses. They took the dead away,
buried every man his own, and put the bodies of those who came from elsewhere
on board the fishing vessels, for the fishermen to take each of them to his own
place. They then met angrily in the place of assembly, and when they were got
together Eupeithes rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death
of his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,
weeping bitterly, “My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great wrong. He
took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he has lost both
ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been killing all the
foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and doing before he can get
away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule, or we shall be ashamed of
ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an everlasting disgrace to us if we
do not avenge the murder of our sons and brothers. For my own part I should
have no more pleasure in life, but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then,
and after them, before they can cross over to the main land.”




He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard Phemius
had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses. Every one was
astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of the assembly, and
Medon said, “Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not do these things against
the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god take the form of Mentor and
stand beside him. This god appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and
now going furiously about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell
thick on one another.”




On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor, rose
to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and future; so
he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,




“Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as they
have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we bade you check the
folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the wantonness of their
hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the wife of a chieftain who they
thought would not return. Now, however, let it be as I say, and do as I tell
you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing
down evil on your own heads.”




This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at once left
the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the speech of
Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes; they therefore
hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed themselves, they met
together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led them on in their folly. He
thought he was going to avenge the murder of his son, whereas in truth he was
never to return, but was himself to perish in his attempt.




Then Minerva said to Jove, “Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer me
this question—What do you propose to do? Will you set them fighting still
further, or will you make peace between them?”




And Jove answered, “My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your own
arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the suitors? Do
whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will be most reasonable
arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them swear to a solemn covenant,
in virtue of which he shall continue to rule, while we cause the others to
forgive and forget the massacre of their sons and brothers. Let them then all
become friends as heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”




This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she darted from
off the topmost summits of Olympus.




Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by saying, “Some
of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to us.” So one of
Dolius’s sons went as he was bid. Standing on the threshold he could see them
all quite near, and said to Ulysses, “Here they are, let us put on our armour
at once.”




They put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say Ulysses, his
three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did the
same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they had all put
on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the
way.




Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form and voice
of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to his son Telemachus,
“Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an engagement, which will show
every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgrace your ancestors, who were eminent
for their strength and courage all the world over.”




“You say truly, my dear father,” answered Telemachus, “and you shall see, if
you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family.”




Laertes was delighted when he heard this. “Good heavens,” he exclaimed, “what a
day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and grandson are vying
with one another in the matter of valour.”




On this Minerva came close up to him and said, “Son of Arceisius—-best friend I
have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove her father; then
poise your spear and hurl it.”




As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed to her
he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes’ helmet, and the spear went
right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his armour rang rattling
round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Meantime Ulysses and his son fell
upon the front line of the foe and smote them with their swords and spears;
indeed, they would have killed every one of them, and prevented them from ever
getting home again, only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one
pause. “Men of Ithaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the
matter at once without further bloodshed.”




On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their arms
dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of the goddess’
voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But Ulysses gave a great
cry, and gathering himself together swooped down like a soaring eagle. Then the
son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire that fell just in front of Minerva, so
she said to Ulysses, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife,
or Jove will be angry with you.”




Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed the
form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace between the
two contending parties.








FOOTNOTES: 







[1]

[ Black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all across
Africa, one half looking West on to the Atlantic, and the other East on to the
Indian Ocean.]









[2]

[ The original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the feet than to
keep them (especially when bare) from a floor which was often wet and dirty.]









[3]

[ The θρόνος or seat, is occasionally called
“high,” as being higher than the θρῆνυς or low
footstool. It was probably no higher than an ordinary chair is now, and seems
to have had no back.]









[4]

[ Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Italy, in what is now the gulf of
Sta Eufemia. It was famous in remote times for its copper mines, which,
however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.]









[5]

[ i.e. “with a current in it”—see illustrations and map near the end of bks.
v. and vi. respectively.]









[6]

[ Reading Νηρίτῳ for
Νηίῳ, cf. “Od.” iii. 81 where the same mistake is made,
and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called Neritum, the same place being
intended both here and in book xiii.]









[7]

[ It is never plausibly explained why Penelope cannot do this, and from bk.
ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the suitors, though
we are asked to believe that she was only fooling them.]









[8]

[ See note on “Od.” i. 365.]









[9]

[ Middle Argos means the Peleponnese which, however, is never so called in the
“Iliad”. I presume “middle” means “middle between the two Greek-speaking
countries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy”; for that parts of
Sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of South Italy, were
inhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries before the Dorian colonisations
can hardly be doubted. The Sicians, and also the Sicels, both of them probably
spoke Greek.]









[10]

[ cf. “Il.” vi. 490-495. In the “Iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,” that is a
man’s matter. It argues a certain hardness, or at any rate dislike of the
“Iliad” on the part of the writer of the “Odyssey,” that she should have
adopted Hector’s farewell to Andromache here, as elsewhere in the poem, for a
scene of such inferior pathos.]









[11]

[ μέγαρα
σκιοέντα The whole open court with
the covered cloister running round it was called
μέγαρον, or
μέγαρα, but the covered part was distinguished
by being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”. It was in this part that the
tables for the suitors were laid. The Fountain Court at Hampton Court may
serve as an illustration (save as regards the use of arches instead of wooden
supports and rafters) and the arrangement is still common in Sicily. The usual
translation “shadowy” or “dusky” halls, gives a false idea of the scene.]









[12]

[ The reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to make it
clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in Ulysses’ house.]









[13]

[ See Appendix; g, in plan of Ulysses’ house.]









[14]

[ I imagine this passage to be a rejoinder to “Il.” xxiii. 702-705 in which a
tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and a good useful maid of all work at only
four. The scrupulous regard of Laertes for his wife’s feelings is of a piece
with the extreme jealousy for the honour of woman, which is manifest
throughout the “Odyssey”.]









[15]

[ χιτῶνα “The χιτών,
or tunica , was a shirt or shift, and served as the chief under garment
of the Greeks and Romans, whether men or women.” Smith’s Dictionary of Greek
and Roman Antiquities, under “Tunica”.]









[16]

[ Doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may be seen in
the older houses at Trapani. There is a slot on the outer side of the door by
means of which a person who has left the room can shoot the bolt. My bedroom
at the Albergo Centrale was fastened in this way.]









[17]

[ πύματον δ’
ὡπλίσσατο
δόρπον. So we vulgarly say “had cooked his
goose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of course know of the fate
Antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been no news of or from Ulysses.]









[18]

[ “Il.” xxii. 416. σχέσθε
φίλοι, καὶ μ’
οἷον ἐάσατε...... The
authoress has bungled by borrowing these words verbatim from the “Iliad”,
without prefixing the necessary “do not,” which I have supplied.]









[19]

[ i.e. you have money, and could pay when I got judgment, whereas the suitors
are men of straw.]









[20]

[ cf. “Il.” ii. 76. ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς
εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’
ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’
ἀνέστη

Νέστωρ, ὄς
ῥα.......................................

ὄ σφιν ἐὺ
φρονέων
ἀγορήσατο καὶ
μετέειπεν.

The Odyssean passage runs—

“ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς
εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’
ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’
ἀνέστη

Μεντορ ὄς
ῥ’.......................................

ὄ σφιν ἐὺ
φρονέων
ἀγορήσατο καὶ
μετέειπεν.

Is it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon that of
Nestor?]









[21]

[ i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner house.]









[22]

[ This would be fair from Sicily, which was doing duty for Ithaca in the mind
of the writer, but a North wind would have been preferable for a voyage from
the real Ithaca to Pylos.]









[23]

[ κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶ
οὶνοπα πόντον
The wind does not whistle over waves. It only whistles through rigging or some
other obstacle that cuts it.]









[24]

[ cf. “Il.” v.20. Ἰδαῖος δ’
ἀπόρουσε
λιπὼν
περικαλλέα
δίφρον, the Odyssean line is
ἠέλιος δ’
ἀνόρουσε
λιπὼν
περικαλλέα
λίμνην. There can be no doubt that the Odyssean
line was suggested by the Iliadic, but nothing can explain why Idæus jumping
from his chariot should suggest to the writer of the “Odyssey” the sun jumping
from the sea. The probability is that she never gave the matter a thought, but
took the line in question as an effect of saturation with the “Iliad,” and of
unconscious cerebration. The “Odyssey” contains many such examples.]









[25]

[ The heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from the inside and
eaten first as being more readily cooked; the {Greek}, or bone meat, was
cooking while the {Greek} or inward parts were being eaten. I imagine that the
thigh bones made a kind of gridiron, while at the same time the marrow inside
them got cooked.]









[26]

[ i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. The meat would be
pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to grill—the two ends of the
skewer being supported in whatever way convenient. Meat so cooking may be seen
in any eating house in Smyrna, or any Eastern town. When I rode across the
Troad from the Dardanelles to Hissarlik and Mount Ida, I noticed that my
dragoman and his men did all our outdoor cooking exactly in the Odyssean and
Iliadic fashion.]









[27]

[ cf. “Il.” xvii. 567. {Greek} The Odyssean lines are—{Greek}]









[28]

[ Reading {Greek} for {Greek}, cf. “Od.” i. 186.]









29[]

[ The geography of the Ægean as above described is correct, but is probably
taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, the existence of which is referred to
“Od.” i. 326, 327 and 350, &c. A glance at the map will show that heaven
advised its supplicants quite correctly.]









[30]

[ The writer—ever jealous for the honour of women—extenuates Clytemnestra’s
guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her having been left
unprotected, and fallen into the hands of a wicked man.]









[31]

[ The Greek is {Greek} cf. “Iliad” ii. 408 {Greek} Surely the {Greek} of the
Odyssean passage was due to the {Greek} of the “Iliad.” No other reason
suggests itself for the making Menelaus return on the very day of the feast
given by Orestes. The fact that in the “Iliad” Menelaus came to a banquet
without waiting for an invitation, determines the writer of the “Odyssey” to
make him come to a banquet, also uninvited, but as circumstances did not
permit of his having been invited, his coming uninvited is shown to have been
due to chance. I do not think the authoress thought all this out, but
attribute the strangeness of the coincidence to unconscious cerebration and
saturation.]









[32]

[ cf. “Il.” I. 458, II. 421. The writer here interrupts an Iliadic passage (to
which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of dwelling upon the
slaughter of the heifer, and of letting Nestor’s wife and daughter enjoy it
also. A male writer, if he was borrowing from the “Iliad,” would have stuck to
his borrowing.]









[33]

[ cf. “Il.” xxiv. 587, 588 where the lines refer to the washing the dead body
of Hector.]









[34]

[ See illustration on opposite page. The yard is typical of many that may be
seen in Sicily. The existing ground-plan is probably unmodified from Odyssean,
and indeed long pre-Odyssean times, but the earlier buildings would have no
arches, and would, one would suppose, be mainly timber. The Odyssean {Greek}
were the sheds that ran round the yard as the arches do now. The {Greek} was
the one through which the main entrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,”
or reverberating. It had an upper story in which visitors were often lodged.]









[35]

[ This journey is an impossible one. Telemachus and Pisistratus would have
been obliged to drive over the Taygetus range, over which there has never yet
been a road for wheeled vehicles. It is plain therefore that the audience for
whom the “Odyssey” was written was one that would be unlikely to know anything
about the topography of the Peloponnese, so that the writer might take what
liberties she chose.]









[36]

[ The lines which I have enclosed in brackets are evidently an
afterthought—added probably by the writer herself—for they evince the same
instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a woman, which is
so noticeable throughout the poem. There is no further sign of any special
festivities nor of any other guests than Telemachus and Pisistratus, until
lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets) are abruptly introduced,
probably with a view of trying to carry off the introduction of the lines now
in question.




The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse and explain the
non-appearance of Hermione in bk. xv., as also of both Hermione and Megapenthes
in the rest of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv. seems to be still a bachelor: the
presumption therefore is that bk. xv. was written before the story of his
marriage here given. I take it he is only married here because his sister is
being married. She having been properly attended to, Megapenthes might as well
be married at the same time. Hermione could not now be less than thirty.




I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “Authoress of the
Odyssey”, p. 136-138. See also p. 256 of the same book.]









[37]

[ Sparta and Lacedaemon are here treated as two different places, though in
other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer understands them as one.
The catalogue in the “Iliad,” which the writer is here presumably following,
makes the same mistake (“Il.” ii. 581, 582)]









[38]

[ These last three lines are identical with “Il.” vxiii. 604-606.]









[39]

[ From the Greek {Greek} it is plain that Menelaus took up the piece of meat
with his fingers.]









[40]

[ Amber is never mentioned in the “Iliad.” Sicily, where I suppose the
“Odyssey” to have been written, has always been, and still is, one of the
principal amber producing countries. It was probably the only one known in the
Odyssean age. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey,” Longmans 1898, p. 186.]









[41]

[ This no doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the Cypria about
Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus of the greater part of his treasures, when
they sailed together for Troy.]









[42]

[ It is inconceivable that Helen should enter thus, in the middle of supper,
intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities were going on.
Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidently dining en famille.]









[43]

[ In the Italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were being hotly
pursued by the Austrian police hid themselves inside Donatello’s colossal
wooden horse in the Salone at Padua, and remained there for a week being fed
by their confederates. In 1898 the last survivor was carried round Padua in
triumph.]









[44]

[ The Greek is {Greek}. Is it unfair to argue that the writer is a person of
somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom a strong smell of fish is distasteful?]









[45]

[ The Greek is {Greek}. I believe this to be a hit at the writer’s own
countrymen who were of Phocaean descent, and the next following line to be a
rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi. 273-288, to the effect
that she gave herself airs and would marry none of her own people. For that
the writer of the “Odyssey” was the person who has been introduced into the
poem under the name of Nausicaa, I cannot bring myself to question. I may
remind English readers that {Greek} (i.e. phoca) means “seal.” Seals almost
always appear on Phocaean coins.]









[46]

[ Surely here again we are in the hands of a writer of delicate sensibility.
It is not as though the seals were stale; they had only just been killed. The
writer, however is obviously laughing at her own countrymen, and insulting
them as openly as she dares.]









[47]

[ We were told above (lines 356, 357) that it was only one day’s sail.]









[48]

[ I give the usual translation, but I do not believe the Greek will warrant
it. The Greek reads {Greek}.




This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats,
and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would have been if
it were fit for breeding horses. I find little authority for such a
translation; the most equitable translation of the text as it stands is,
“Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and delectable rather than fit for
breeding horses; for not one of the islands is good driving ground, nor well
meadowed.” Surely the writer does not mean that a pleasant or delectable island
would not be fit for breeding horses? The most equitable translation,
therefore, of the present text being thus halt and impotent, we may suspect
corruption, and I hazard the following emendation, though I have not adopted it
in my translation, as fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. I would
read:—{Greek}.




As far as scanning goes the {Greek} is not necessary; {Greek} iv. 72, (Footnote
Greek) iv. 233, to go no further afield than earlier lines of the same book,
give sufficient authority for {Greek}, but the {Greek} would not be redundant;
it would emphasise the surprise of the contrast, and I should prefer to have
it, though it is not very important either way. This reading of course should
be translated “Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by your leave)
itself a horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not one of the
islands is good and well meadowed ground.”




This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors. “How,” they would ask
themselves, “could an island be a horseman?” and they would cast about for an
emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. Eryx might perhaps make the meaning
intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of the text to the reader as
readily as it did to myself.




I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the “Odyssey” was
familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt. Eryx, and that the Aegadean
islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty with her for the Ionian
islands—Marettimo, the highest and most westerly of the group, standing for
Ithaca. When seen from the top of Mt. Eryx Marettimo shows as it should do
according to “Od.” ix. 25, 26, “on the horizon, all highest up in the sea
towards the West,” while the other islands lie “some way off it to the East.”
As we descend to Trapani, Marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island
of Levanzo, behind which it disappears. My friend, the late Signor E. Biaggini,
pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of Levanzo, and said to
me “Come cavalca bene” (“How well it rides”), and this immediately suggested my
emendation to me. Later on I found in the hymn to the Pythian Apollo (which
abounds with tags taken from the “Odyssey”) a line ending {Greek} which
strengthened my suspicion that this was the original ending of the second of
the two lines above under consideration.]









[49]

[ See note on line 3 of this book. The reader will observe that the writer has
been unable to keep the women out of an interpolation consisting only of four
lines.]









[50]

[ Scheria means a piece of land jutting out into the sea. In my “Authoress of
the Odyssey” I thought “Jutland” would be a suitable translation, but it has
been pointed out to me that “Jutland” only means the land of the Jutes.]









[51]

[ Irrigation as here described is common in gardens near Trapani. The water
that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by a mule who turns a wheel with
buckets on it.]









[52]

[ There is not a word here about the cattle of the sun-god.]









[53]

[ The writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might also be well
seasoned.]









[54]

[ The reader will note that the river was flowing with salt water i.e. that it
was tidal.]









[55]

[ Then the Ogygian island was not so far off, but that Nausicaa might be
assumed to know where it was.]









[56]

[ Greek {Greek}]









[57]

[ I suspect a family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of which we know
nothing, in this story of Eurymedusa’s having been brought from Apeira. The
Greek word “apeiros” means “inexperienced,” “ignorant.” Is it possible that
Eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?]









[58]

[ Polyphemus was also son to Neptune, see “Od.” ix. 412, 529. he was therefore
half brother to Nausithous, half uncle to King Alcinous, and half great uncle
to Nausicaa.]









[59]

[ It would seem as though the writer thought that Marathon was close to
Athens.]









[60]

[ Here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (with embellishments) from
things actually existing, becomes impatient of past tenses and slides into the
present.]









[61]

[ This is hidden malice, implying that the Phaeacian magnates were no better
than they should be. The final drink-offering should have been made to Jove or
Neptune, not to the god of thievishness and rascality of all kinds. In line
164 we do indeed find Echeneus proposing that a drink-offering should be made
to Jove, but Mercury is evidently, according to our authoress, the god who was
most likely to be of use to them.]









[62]

[ The fact of Alcinous knowing anything about the Cyclopes suggests that in
the writer’s mind Scheria and the country of the Cyclopes were not very far
from one another. I take the Cyclopes and the giants to be one and the same
people.]









[63]

[ “My property, etc.” The authoress is here adopting an Iliadic line (xix.
333), and this must account for the absence of all reference to Penelope. If
she had happened to remember “Il.” v. 213, she would doubtless have
appropriated it by preference, for that line reads “my country, my
wife , and all the greatness of my house.”]









[64]

[ The at first inexplicable sleep of Ulysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.) is here, as
also in viii. 445, being obviously prepared. The writer evidently attached the
utmost importance to it. Those who know that the harbour which did duty with
the writer of the “Odyssey” for the one in which Ulysses landed in Ithaca, was
only about 2 miles from the place in which Ulysses is now talking with
Alcinous, will understand why the sleep was so necessary.]









[65]

[ There were two classes—the lower who were found in provisions which they had
to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts, where they would also
eat—and the upper who would eat in the cloisters of the inner court, and have
their cooking done for them.]









[66]

[ Translation very dubious. I suppose the {Greek} here to be the covered sheds
that ran round the outer courtyard. See illustrations at the end of bk. iii.]









[67]

[ The writer apparently deems that the words “as compared with what oxen can
plough in the same time” go without saying. Not so the writer of the “Iliad”
from which the Odyssean passage is probably taken. He explains that mules can
plough quicker than oxen (“Il.” x. 351-353)]









[68]

[ It was very fortunate that such a disc happened to be there, seeing that
none like it were in common use.]









[69]

[ “Il.” xiii. 37. Here, as so often elsewhere in the “Odyssey,” the
appropriation of an Iliadic line which is not quite appropriate puzzles the
reader. The “they” is not the chains, nor yet Mars and Venus. It is an
overflow from the Iliadic passage in which Neptune hobbles his horses in bonds
“which none could either unloose or break so that they might stay there in
that place.” If the line would have scanned without the addition of the words
“so that they might stay there in that place,” they would have been omitted in
the “Odyssey.”]









[70]

[ The reader will note that Alcinous never goes beyond saying that he is going
to give the goblet; he never gives it. Elsewhere in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey”
the offer of a present is immediately followed by the statement that it was
given and received gladly—Alcinous actually does give a chest and a cloak and
shirt—probably also some of the corn and wine for the long two-mile voyage was
provided by him—but it is quite plain that he gave no talent and no cup.]









[71]

[ “Il.” xviii. 344-349. These lines in the “Iliad” tell of the preparation for
washing the body of Patroclus, and I am not pleased that the writer of the
“Odyssey” should have adopted them here.]









[72]

[ see note [64] : ]









[73]

[ see note [43] : ]









[74]

[ The reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk. xiii]









[75]

[ If the other islands lay some distance away from Ithaca (which the word
{Greek} suggests), what becomes of the
πόρθμος or gut between Ithaca and Samos
which we hear of in Bks. iv. and xv.? I suspect that the authoress in her mind
makes Telemachus come back from Pylos to the Lilybaean promontory and thence
to Trapani through the strait between the Isola Grande and the
mainland—the island of Asteria being the one on which Motya afterwards stood.]









[76]

[ “Il.” xviii. 533-534. The sudden lapse into the third person here for a
couple of lines is due to the fact that the two Iliadic lines taken are in the
third person.]









[77]

[ cf. “Il.” ii. 776. The words in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” are [Footnote
Greek]. In the “Iliad” they are used of the horses of Achilles’ followers as
they stood idle, “champing lotus.”]









[78]

[ I take all this passage about the Cyclopes having no ships to be
sarcastic—meaning, “You people of Drepanum have no excuse for not colonising
the island of Favognana, which you could easily do, for you have plenty of
ships, and the island is a very good one.” For that the island so fully
described here is the Aegadean or “goat” island of Favognana, and that the
Cyclopes are the old Sican inhabitants of Mt. Eryx should not be doubted.]









[79]

[ For the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be so
exceptionally dark see “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 188-189.]









[80]

[ None but such lambs as would suck if they were with their mothers would be
left in the yard. The older lambs should have been out feeding. The authoress
has got it all wrong, but it does not matter. See “The Authoress of the
Odyssey” p. 148.]









[81]

[ This line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and is omitted (with
note) by Messrs. Butcher & Lang. But lines enclosed in brackets are almost
always genuine; all that brackets mean is that the bracketed passage puzzled
some early editor, who nevertheless found it too well established in the text
to venture on omitting it. In the present case the line bracketed is the very
last which a full-grown male editor would be likely to interpolate. It is
safer to infer that the writer, a young woman, not knowing or caring at which
end of the ship the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it at
both ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line 340)
at the stern of the ship. As for the two rocks thrown, the first I take to be
the Asinelli, see map facing p. 80. The second I see as the two contiguous
islands of the Formiche, which are treated as one, see map facing p. 108. The
Asinelli is an island shaped like a boat, and pointing to the island of
Favognana. I think the authoress’s compatriots, who probably did not like her
much better that she did them, jeered at the absurdity of Ulysses’ conduct,
and saw the Asinelli or “donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by Polyphemus, but
as the boat itself containing Ulysses and his men.]









[82]

[ This line exists in the text here but not in the corresponding passage xii.
141. I am inclined to think it is interpolated (probably by the poetess
herself) from the first of lines xi. 115-137, which I can hardly doubt were
added by the writer when the scheme of the work was enlarged and altered. See
“The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 254-255.]









[83]

[ “Floating” (πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally.
The island itself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. There is
no indication of its moving during the month that Ulysses stayed with Aeolus,
and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, he seems to have found it in
the same place. The πλωτῇ in fact should no more be
pressed than θοῇσι as applied to islands, “Odyssey”
xv. 299—where they are called “flying” because the ship would fly past them.
So also the “Wanderers,” as explained by Buttmann; see note on “Odyssey” xii.
57.]









[84]

[ Literally “for the ways of the night and of the day are near.” I have seen
what Mr. Andrew Lang says (“Homer and the Epic,” p. 236, and “Longman’s
Magazine” for January, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route” and the “Sacred
Way” in this connection; but until he gives his grounds for holding that the
Mediterranean peoples in the Odyssean age used to go far North for their amber
instead of getting it in Sicily, where it is still found in considerable
quantities, I do not know what weight I ought to attach to his opinion. I have
been unable to find grounds for asserting that B.C. 1000 there was any
commerce between the Mediterranean and the “Far North,” but I shall be very
ready to learn if Mr. Lang will enlighten me. See “The Authoress of the
Odyssey” pp. 185-186.]









[85]

[ One would have thought that when the sun was driving the stag down to the
water, Ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.]









[86]

[ See Hobbes of Malmesbury’s translation.]









[87]

[ “Il.” vxiii. 349. Again the writer draws from the washing the body of
Patroclus—which offends.]









[88]

[ This visit is wholly without topographical significance.]









[89]

[ Brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination of the writer,
as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.]









[90]

[ Ulysses was, in fact, to become a missionary and preach Neptune to people
who knew not his name. I was fortunate enough to meet in Sicily a woman
carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not much shorter than an oar,
and I was able at once to see what the writer of the “Odyssey” intended.]









[91]

[ I suppose the lines I have enclosed in brackets to have been added by the
author when she enlarged her original scheme by the addition of books i.-iv.
and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. The reader will observe that in the
corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) the prophecy ends with “after losing all
your comrades,” and that there is no allusion to the suitors. For fuller
explanation see “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 254-255.]









[92]

[ The reader will remember that we are in the first year of Ulysses’
wanderings, Telemachus therefore was only eleven years old. The same
anachronism is made later on in this book. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey”
pp. 132-133.]









[93]

[ Tradition says that she had hanged herself. Cf. “Odyssey” xv. 355, etc.]









[94]

[ Not to be confounded with Aeolus king of the winds.]









[95]

[ Melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.]









[96]

[ I have already said in a note on bk. xi. 186 that at this point of Ulysses’
voyage Telemachus could only be between eleven and twelve years old.]









[97]

[ Is the writer a man or a woman?]









[98]

[ Cf. “Il.” iv. 521, {Greek}. The Odyssean line reads, {Greek}. The famous
dactylism, therefore, of the Odyssean line was probably suggested by that of
the Ileadic rather than by a desire to accommodate sound to sense. At any rate
the double coincidence of a dactylic line, and an ending {Greek}, seems
conclusive as to the familiarity of the writer of the “Odyssey” with the
Iliadic line.]









[99]

[ Off the coast of Sicily and South Italy, in the month of May, I have seen
men fastened half way up a boat’s mast with their feet resting on a
crosspiece, just large enough to support them. From this point of vantage they
spear sword-fish. When I saw men thus employed I could hardly doubt that the
writer of the “Odyssey” had seen others like them, and had them in her mind
when describing the binding of Ulysses. I have therefore with some diffidence
ventured to depart from the received translation of
ἰστοπέδη (cf. Alcaeus frag. 18,
where, however, it is very hard to say what
ἰστοπέδαν means). In Sophocles’
Lexicon I find a reference to Chrysostom (l, 242, A. Ed. Benedictine Paris
1834-1839) for the word ἰστοπόδη,
which is probably the same as
ἰστοπέδη, but I have looked for the
passage in vain.]









[100]

[ The writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on Circe. When Ulysses
comes to take the route prescribed by Circe, he ought to pass either the
Wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are not told, but he does not
do so. The Planctae, or Wanderers, merge into Scylla and Charybdis, and the
alternative between them and something untold merges into the alternative
whether Ulysses had better choose Scylla or Charybdis. Yet from line 260, it
seems we are to consider the Wanderers as having been passed by Ulysses; this
appears even more plainly from xxiii. 327, in which Ulysses expressly mentions
the Wandering rocks as having been between the Sirens and Scylla and
Charybdis. The writer, however, is evidently unaware that she does not quite
understand her own story; her difficulty was perhaps due to the fact that
though Trapanese sailors had given her a fair idea as to where all her other
localities really were, no one in those days more than in our own could
localise the Planctae, which in fact, as Buttmann has argued, were derived not
from any particular spot, but from sailors’ tales about the difficulties of
navigating the group of the Aeolian islands as a whole (see note on “Od.” x.
3). Still the matter of the poor doves caught her fancy, so she would not
forgo them. The whirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on Scylla suggests
allusion to Stromboli and perhaps even Etna. Scylla is on the Italian side,
and therefore may be said to look West. It is about 8 miles thence to the
Sicilian coast, so Ulysses may be perfectly well told that after passing
Scylla he will come to the Thrinacian island or Sicily. Charybdis is
transposed to a site some few miles to the north of its actual position.]









[101]

[ I suppose this line to have been intercalated by the author when lines
426-446 were added.]









[102]

[ For the reasons which enable us to identify the island of the two Sirens
with the Lipari island now Salinas—the ancient Didyme, or “twin” island—see
The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 195, 196. The two Sirens doubtless were, as
their name suggests, the whistling gusts, or avalanches of air that at times
descend without a moment’s warning from the two lofty mountains of Salinas—as
also from all high points in the neighbourhood.]









[103]

[ See Admiral Smyth on the currents in the Straits of Messina, quoted in “The
Authoress of the Odyssey,” p. 197.]









[104]

[ In the islands of Favognana and Marettimo off Trapani I have seen men fish
exactly as here described. They chew bread into a paste and throw it into the
sea to attract the fish, which they then spear. No line is used.]









[105]

[ The writer evidently regards Ulysses as on a coast that looked East at no
great distance south of the Straits of Messina somewhere, say, near
Tauromenium, now Taormina.]









[106]

[ Surely there must be a line missing here to tell us that the keel and mast
were carried down into Charybdis. Besides, the aorist {Greek} in its present
surrounding is perplexing. I have translated it as though it were an
imperfect; I see Messrs. Butcher and Lang translate it as a pluperfect, but
surely Charybdis was in the act of sucking down the water when Ulysses
arrived.]









[107]

[ I suppose the passage within brackets to have been an afterthought but to
have been written by the same hand as the rest of the poem. I suppose xii. 103
to have been also added by the writer when she decided on sending Ulysses back
to Charybdis. The simile suggests the hand of the wife or daughter of a
magistrate who had often seen her father come in cross and tired.]









[108]

[ Gr.
πολυδαίδαλος.
This puts coined money out of the question, but nevertheless implies that the
gold had been worked into ornaments of some kind.]









[109]

[ I suppose Teiresias’ prophecy of bk. xi. 114-120 had made no impression on
Ulysses. More probably the prophecy was an afterthought, intercalated, as I
have already said, by the authoress when she changed her scheme.]









[110]

[ A male writer would have made Ulysses say, not “may you give satisfaction to
your wives,” but “may your wives give satisfaction to you.”]









[111]

[ See note [64].]









[112]

[ The land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt works of S.
Cusumano—the neighbourhood of Trapani and Mt. Eryx being made to do double
duty, both as Scheria and Ithaca. Hence the necessity for making Ulysses set
out after dark, fall instantly into a profound sleep, and wake up on a morning
so foggy that he could not see anything till the interviews between Neptune
and Jove and between Ulysses and Minerva should have given the audience time
to accept the situation. See illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and
vi. respectively.]









[113]

[ This cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, is now called
the “grotta del toro,” probably a corruption of “tesoro,” for it is held to
contain a treasure. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 167-170.]









[114]

[ Probably they would.]









[115]

[ Then it had a shallow shelving bottom.]









[116]

[ Doubtless the road would pass the harbour in Odyssean times as it passes the
salt works now; indeed, if there is to be a road at all there is no other
level ground which it could take. See map above referred to.]









[117]

[ The rock at the end of the Northern harbour of Trapani, to which I suppose
the writer of the “Odyssey” to be here referring, still bears the name
Malconsiglio—“the rock of evil counsel.” There is a legend that it was a ship
of Turkish pirates who were intending to attack Trapani, but the “Madonna di
Trapani” crushed them under this rock just as they were coming into port. My
friend Cavaliere Giannitrapani of Trapani told me that his father used to tell
him when he was a boy that if he would drop exactly three drops of oil on to
the water near the rock, he would see the ship still at the bottom. The legend
is evidently a Christianised version of the Odyssean story, while the name
supplies the additional detail that the disaster happened in consequence of an
evil counsel.]









[118]

[ It would seem then that the ship had got all the way back from Ithaca in
about a quarter of an hour.]









[119]

[ And may we not add “and also to prevent his recognising that he was only in
the place where he had met Nausicaa two days earlier.”]









[120]

[ All this is to excuse the entire absence of Minerva from books ix.-xii.,
which I suppose had been written already, before the authoress had determined
on making Minerva so prominent a character.]









[121]

[ We have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover the writer’s change of
scheme at the end of bk. vi.]









[122]

[ I take the following from The Authoress of the Odyssey, p. 167. “It is clear
from the text that there were two [caves] not one, but some one has enclosed
in brackets the two lines in which the second cave is mentioned, I presume
because he found himself puzzled by having a second cave sprung upon him when
up to this point he had only been told of one.




“I venture to think that if he had known the ground he would not have been
puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards from one
another.” The cave in which Ulysses hid his treasure is, as I have already
said, identifiable with singular completeness. The other cave presents no
special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.]









[123]

[ There is no attempt to disguise the fact that Penelope had long given
encouragement to the suitors. The only defence set up is that she did not
really mean to encourage them. Would it not have been wiser to have tried a
little discouragement?]









[124]

[ See map near the end of bk. vi. Ruccazzù dei corvi of course means
“the rock of the ravens.” Both name and ravens still exist.]









[125]

[ See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 140, 141. The real reason for sending
Telemachus to Pylos and Lacedaemon was that the authoress might get Helen of
Troy into her poem. He was sent at the only point in the story at which he
could be sent, so he must have gone then or not at all.]









[126]

[ The site I assign to Eumaeus’s hut, close to the Ruccazzù dei corvi ,
is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive view.]









[127]

[ Sandals such as Eumaeus was making are still worn in the Abruzzi and
elsewhere. An oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holes are cut at the
four corners, and through these holes leathern straps are passed, which are
bound round the foot and cross-gartered up the calf.]









[128]

[ See note [75] : ]









[129]

[ Telemachus like many another good young man seems to expect every one to
fetch and carry for him.]









[130]

[ “Il.” vi. 288. The store room was fragrant because it was made of cedar
wood. See “Il.” xxiv. 192.]









[131]

[ cf. “Il.” vi. 289 and 293-296. The dress was kept at the bottom of the chest
as one that would only be wanted on the greatest occasions; but surely the
marriage of Hermione and of Megapenthes (bk, iv. ad init .) might have
induced Helen to wear it on the preceding evening, in which case it could
hardly have got back. We find no hint here of Megapenthes’ recent marriage.]









[132]

[ See note [83].]









[133]

[ cf. “Od.” xi. 196, etc.]









[134]

[ The names Syra and Ortygia, on which island a great part of the Doric
Syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in Odyssean times there was a
prehistoric Syracuse, the existence of which was known to the writer of the
poem.]









[135]

[ Literally “where are the turnings of the sun.” Assuming, as we may safely
do, that the Syra and Ortygia of the “Odyssey” refer to Syracuse, it is the
fact that not far to the South of these places the land turns sharply round,
so that mariners following the coast would find the sun upon the other side of
their ship to that on which they’d had it hitherto.




Mr. A. S. Griffith has kindly called my attention to Herod iv. 42, where,
speaking of the circumnavigation of Africa by Phoenician mariners under Necos,
he writes:




“On their return they declared—I for my part do not believe them, but perhaps
others may—that in sailing round Libya [i.e. Africa] they had the sun upon
their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya first discovered.




“I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come from Syracuse because the writer
thought she rather ought to have made something happen at Syracuse during her
account of the voyages of Ulysses. She could not, however, break his long drift
from Charybdis to the island of Pantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it
up to Syracuse in another way.”




Modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two pre-Dorian
communities at Syracuse; they were, so Dr. Orsi informed me, at Plemmirio and
Cozzo Pantano. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 211-213.]









[136]

[ This harbour is again evidently the harbour in which Ulysses had landed,
i.e. the harbour that is now the salt works of S. Cusumano.]









[137]

[ This never can have been anything but very niggardly pay for some eight or
nine days’ service. I suppose the crew were to consider the pleasure of having
had a trip to Pylos as a set off. There is no trace of the dinner as having
been actually given, either on the following or any other morning.]









[138]

[ No hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.]









[139]

[ The text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense as it stands. I
follow Messrs. Butcher & Lang in omitting line 101.]









[140]

[ i.e. to be milked, as in South Italian and Sicilian towns at the present
day.]









[141]

[ The butchering and making ready the carcases took place partly in the outer
yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.]









[142]

[ These words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon after they were
spoken. Ulysses and Eumaeus reached the town which was “some way off” (xvii.
25) in time for the suitor’s early meal (xvii. 170 and 176) say at ten or
eleven o’ clock. The context of the rest of the book shows this. Eumaeus and
Ulysses, therefore, cannot have started later than eight or nine, and
Eumaeus’s words must be taken as an exaggeration for the purpose of making
Ulysses bestir himself.]









[143]

[ I imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where the church of the
Madonna di Trapani now stands, and to have been fed with water from
what is now called the Fontana Diffali on Mt. Eryx.]









[144]

[ From this and other passages in the “Odyssey” it appears that we are in an
age anterior to the use of coined money—an age when cauldrons, tripods,
swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures of corn, wine, or oil, etc.
etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver, bronze, or even iron, wrought more or
less, but unstamped, were the nearest approach to a currency that had as yet
been reached.]









[145]

[ Gr. ἐς μέσσον.]









[146]

[ I correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach of Hesiod, but surely
this passage suggests acquaintance with the Works and Ways, though it by no
means compels it.]









[147]

[ It would seem as though Eurynome and Euryclea were the same person. See note
156]









[148]

[ It is plain, therefore, that Iris was commonly accepted as the messenger of
the gods, though our authoress will never permit her to fetch or carry for any
one.]









[149]

[ i.e. the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.]









[150]

[See note 156]









[151]

[ These, I imagine, must have been in the open part of the inner courtyard,
where the maids also stood, and threw the light of their torches into the
covered cloister that ran all round it. The smoke would otherwise have been
intolerable.]









[152]

[ Translation very uncertain; vide Liddell and Scott, under {Greek}]









[153]

[ See photo on opposite page.]









[154]

[ cf. “Il.” ii. 184, and 217, 218. An additional and well-marked feature being
wanted to convince Penelope, the writer has taken the hunched shoulders of
Thersites (who is mentioned immediately after Eurybates in the “Iliad”) and
put them on to Eurybates’ back.]









[155]

[ This is how geese are now fed in Sicily, at any rate in summer, when the
grass is all burnt up. I have never seen them grazing.]









[156]

[ Lower down (line 143) Euryclea says it was herself that had thrown the cloak
over Ulysses—for the plural should not be taken as implying more than one
person. The writer is evidently still fluctuating between Euryclea and
Eurynome as the name for the old nurse. She probably originally meant to call
her Euryclea, but finding it not immediately easy to make Euryclea scan in
xvii. 495, she hastily called her Eurynome, intending either to alter this
name later or to change the earlier Euryclea’s into Eurynome. She then drifted
in to Eurynome as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankering
after Euryclea, till at last she found that the path of least resistance would
lie in the direction of making Eurynome and Euryclea two persons. Therefore in
xxiii. 289-292 both Eurynome and “the nurse” (who can be none other than
Euryclea) come on together. I do not say that this is feminine, but it is not
unfeminine.]









[157]

[ See note [156]]









[158]

[ This, I take it, was immediately in front of the main entrance of the inner
courtyard into the body of the house.]









[159]

[ This is the only allusion to Sardinia in either “Iliad” or “Odyssey.”]









[160]

[ The normal translation of the Greek word would be “holding back,” “curbing,”
“restraining,” but I cannot think that the writer meant this—she must have
been using the word in its other sense of “having,” “holding,” “keeping,”
“maintaining.”]









[161]

[ I have vainly tried to realise the construction of the fastening here
described.]









[162]

[ See plan of Ulysses’ house in the appendix. It is evident that the open part
of the court had no flooring but the natural soil.]









[163]

[ See plan of Ulysses’ house, and note [175].]









[164]

[ i.e. the door that led into the body of the house.]









[165]

[ This was, no doubt, the little table that was set for Ulysses, “Od.” xx.
259.




Surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. I suppose the iron
part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound securely to
it—the handle being half buried in the ground. The axe would be placed edgeways
towards the archer, and he would have to shoot his arrow through the hole into
which the handle was fitted when the axe was in use. Twelve axes were placed in
a row all at the same height, all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways
to Ulysses whose arrow passed through all the holes from the first onward. I
cannot see how the Greek can bear any other interpretation, the words being,
{Greek}




“He did not miss a single hole from the first onwards.” {Greek} according to
Liddell and Scott being “the hole for the handle of an axe, etc.,” while
{Greek} (“Od.” v. 236) is, according to the same authorities, the handle
itself. The feat is absurdly impossible, but our authoress sometimes has a soul
above impossibilities.]









[166]

[ The reader will note how the spoiling of good food distresses the writer
even in such a supreme moment as this.]









[167]

[ Here we have it again. Waste of substance comes first.]









[168]

[ cf. “Il.” iii. 337 and three other places. It is strange that the author of
the “Iliad” should find a little horse-hair so alarming. Possibly enough she
was merely borrowing a common form line from some earlier poet—or poetess—for
this is a woman’s line rather than a man’s.]









[169]

[ Or perhaps simply “window.” See plan in the appendix.]









[170]

[ i.e. the pavement on which Ulysses was standing.]









[171]

[ The interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and at best we are in a
region of melodrama: cf., however, i. 425, etc. from which it appears that
there was a tower in the outer court, and that Telemachus used to sleep in it.
The ὀρσοθύρα I take to be a door, or
trap door, leading on to the roof above Telemachus’s bed room, which we are
told was in a place that could be seen from all round—or it might be simply a
window in Telemachus’s room looking out into the street. From the top of the
tower the outer world was to be told what was going on, but people could not
get in by the ὀρσοθύρα: they would
have to come in by the main entrance, and Melanthius explains that the mouth
of the narrow passage (which was in the lands of Ulysses and his friends)
commanded the only entrance by which help could come, so that there would be
nothing gained by raising an alarm.

    As for the ῥῶγες of line 143, no commentator
ancient or modern has been able to say what was intended—but whatever they
were, Melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, and twelve
spears. Moreover, where he could go the others could go also. If a dozen
suitors had followed Melanthius into the house they could have attacked Ulysses
in the rear, in which case, unless Minerva had intervened promptly, the
“Odyssey” would have had a different ending. But throughout the scene we are in
a region of extravagance rather than of true fiction—it cannot be taken
seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode of Phemius
and Medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.]









[172]

[ I presume it was intended that there should be a hook driven into the
bearing-post.]









[173]

[ What for?]









[174]

[ Gr: {Greek}. This is not {Greek}.]









[175]

[ From lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 of bk. xxi we can
locate the approach to the {Greek} with some certainty.]









[176]

[ But in xix. 500-502 Ulysses scolded Euryclea for offering information on
this very point, and declared himself quite able to settle it for himself.]









[177]

[ There were a hundred and eight Suitors.]









[178]

[ Lord Grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself to easy
imposition, has been good enough to write to me about my conviction that the
“Odyssey” was written by a woman, and to send me remarks upon the gross
absurdity of the incident here recorded. It is plain that all the authoress
cared about was that the women should be hanged: as for attempting to realise,
or to make her readers realise, how the hanging was done, this was of no
consequence. The reader must take her word for it and ask no questions. Lord
Grimthorpe wrote:




“I had better send you my ideas about Nausicaa’s hanging of the maids (not
‘maidens,’ of whom Froude wrote so well in his ‘Science of History’) before I
forget it all. Luckily for me Liddell & Scott have specially translated
most of the doubtful words, referring to this very place.




“A ship’s cable. I don’t know how big a ship she meant, but it must have been a
very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could be used to tie tightly round a
woman’s neck, and still more round a dozen of them ‘in a row,’ besides being
strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.




“A dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than a dozen
strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof over them; and the
idea of pulling them up by a rope hung anyhow round a pillar {Greek} is
absurdly impossible; and how a dozen of them could be hung dangling round one
post is a problem which a senior wrangler would be puzzled to answer... She had
better have let Telemachus use his sword as he had intended till she changed
his mind for him.”]









[179]

[ Then they had all been in Ulysses’ service over twenty years; perhaps the
twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.]









[180]

[ Translation very doubtful—cf. “It.” xxiv. 598.]









[181]

[ But why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of which Euryclea had
told her, or why could not Ulysses have shown it to her?]









[182]

[ The people of Ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping as the Phaeacians
were in vi. 273, etc.]









[183]

[ See note [156]. Ulysses’s bed room does not appear to have been upstairs,
nor yet quite within the house. Is it possible that it was “the domed room”
round the outside of which the erring maids were, for aught we have heard to
the contrary, still hanging?]









[184]

[ Ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here too apparently down
stairs.]









[185]

[ Penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappears from the
poem.]









[186]

[ So practised a washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew that by this time
the web must have become such a wreck that it would have gone to pieces in the
wash.]




A lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands, that no
really good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or character was worth
consideration—could have endured, no matter for what reason, the unpicking of
her day’s work, day after day for between three and four years.]









[187]

[ We must suppose Dolius not yet to know that his son Melanthius had been
tortured, mutilated, and left to die by Ulysses’ orders on the preceding day,
and that his daughter Melantho had been hanged. Dolius was probably
exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical. So on Mt. Eryx I was
shown a man who was always called Sonza Malizia or “Guileless”—he being held
exceptionally cunning.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY *** 



Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.



Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE 
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE 
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK 


To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.



Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.



1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.



1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.



1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:



1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org . If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.




1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.



1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.



1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.



1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.



1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:




• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”



• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.



• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.



• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.




1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.



1.F.



1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.



1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.



1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.



1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.



1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.



1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.



Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™



Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.



Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.



The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact.



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.



The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate .



While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.



International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.



Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.



Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.



Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.



Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org .



This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

=== AENEID BOOK 1 ===

THE COMING OF AENEAS TO CARTHAGE 


I sing of arms and the man who of old from the coasts of Troy came, an
exile of fate, to Italy and the shore of Lavinium; hard driven on land
and on the deep by the violence of heaven, for cruel Juno's unforgetful
anger, and hard bestead in war also, ere he might found a city and carry
his gods into Latium; from whom is the Latin race, the lords of Alba,
and the stately city Rome.



Muse, tell me why, for what attaint of her deity, or in what vexation,
did the Queen of heaven drive one so excellent in goodness to circle
through so many afflictions, to face so many toils? Is anger so fierce
in celestial spirits?





There was a city of ancient days that Tyrian settlers dwelt in,
Carthage, over against Italy and the Tiber mouths afar; rich of store,
and mighty in war's fierce pursuits; wherein, they say, alone beyond all
other lands had Juno her seat, and held Samos itself less dear. Here was
her armour, here her chariot; even now, if fate permit, the goddess
strives to nurture it for queen of the nations. Nevertheless she had
heard a race was issuing of the blood of [20-53] Troy, which sometime
should overthrow her Tyrian citadel; from it should come a people, lord
of lands and tyrannous in war, the destroyer of Libya: so rolled the
destinies. Fearful of that, the daughter of Saturn, the old war in her
remembrance that she fought at Troy for her beloved Argos long ago,—nor
had the springs of her anger nor the bitterness of her vexation yet gone
out of mind: deep stored in her soul lies the judgment of Paris, the
insult of her slighted beauty, the hated race and the dignities of
ravished Ganymede; fired with this also, she tossed all over ocean the
Trojan remnant left of the Greek host and merciless Achilles, and held
them afar from Latium; and many a year were they wandering driven of
fate around all the seas. Such work was it to found the Roman people.



Hardly out of sight of the land of Sicily did they set their sails to
sea, and merrily upturned the salt foam with brazen prow, when Juno, the
undying wound still deep in her heart, thus broke out alone:



'Am I then to abandon my baffled purpose, powerless to keep the Teucrian
king from Italy? and because fate forbids me? Could Pallas lay the
Argive fleet in ashes, and sink the Argives in the sea, for one man's
guilt, mad Oïlean Ajax? Her hand darted Jove's flying fire from the
clouds, scattered their ships, upturned the seas in tempest; him, his
pierced breast yet breathing forth the flame, she caught in a whirlwind
and impaled on a spike of rock. But I, who move queen among immortals, I
sister and wife of Jove, wage warfare all these years with a single
people; and is there any who still adores Juno's divinity, or will kneel
to lay sacrifice on her altars?'



Such thoughts inly revolving in her kindled bosom, the goddess reaches
Aeolia, the home of storm-clouds, the land laden with furious southern
gales. Here in a desolate cavern Aeolus keeps under royal dominion and
yokes in [54-85] dungeon fetters the struggling winds and loud storms.
They with mighty moan rage indignant round their mountain barriers. In
his lofty citadel Aeolus sits sceptred, assuages their temper and
soothes their rage; else would they carry with them seas and lands, and
the depth of heaven, and sweep them through space in their flying
course. But, fearful of this, the lord omnipotent hath hidden them in
caverned gloom, and laid a mountain mass high over them, and appointed
them a ruler, who should know by certain law to strain and slacken the
reins at command. To him now Juno spoke thus in suppliant accents:



'Aeolus—for to thee hath the father of gods and king of men given the
wind that lulls and that lifts the waves—a people mine enemy sails the
Tyrrhene sea, carrying into Italy the conquered gods of their Ilian
home. Rouse thy winds to fury, and overwhelm their sinking vessels, or
drive them asunder and strew ocean with their bodies. Mine are twice
seven nymphs of passing loveliness; her who of them all is most
excellent in beauty, Deïopea, I will unite to thee in wedlock to be
thine for ever; that for this thy service she may fulfil all her years
at thy side, and make thee father of a beautiful race.'



Aeolus thus returned: 'Thine, O queen, the task to search whereto thou
hast desire; for me it is right to do thy bidding. From thee have I this
poor kingdom, from thee my sceptre and Jove's grace; thou dost grant me
to take my seat at the feasts of the gods, and makest me sovereign over
clouds and storms.'



Even with these words, turning his spear, he struck the side of the
hollow hill, and the winds, as in banded array, pour where passage is
given them, and cover earth with eddying blasts. East wind and west wind
together, and the gusty south-wester, falling prone on the sea, stir it
up [86-120] from its lowest chambers, and roll vast billows to the
shore. Behind rises shouting of men and whistling of cordage. In a
moment clouds blot sky and daylight from the Teucrians' eyes; black
night broods over the deep. Pole thunders to pole, and the air quivers
with incessant flashes; all menaces them with instant death. Straightway
Aeneas' frame grows unnerved and chill, and stretching either hand to
heaven, he cries thus aloud: 'Ah, thrice and four times happy they who
found their doom under high Troy town before their fathers' faces! Ah,
son of Tydeus, bravest of the Grecian race, that I could not have fallen
on the Ilian plains, and gasped out this my life beneath thine hand!
where under the spear of Aeacides lies fierce Hector, lies mighty
Sarpedon; where Simoïs so often bore beneath his whirling wave shields
and helmets and brave bodies of men.'



As the cry leaves his lips, a gust of the shrill north strikes full on
the sail and raises the waves up to heaven. The oars are snapped; the
prow swings away and gives her side to the waves; down in a heap comes a
broken mountain of water. These hang on the wave's ridge; to these the
yawning billow shows ground amid the surge, where the sea churns with
sand. Three ships the south wind catches and hurls on hidden rocks,
rocks amid the waves which Italians call the Altars, a vast reef banking
the sea. Three the east forces from the deep into shallows and
quicksands, piteous to see, dashes on shoals and girdles with a
sandbank. One, wherein loyal Orontes and his Lycians rode, before their
lord's eyes a vast sea descending strikes astern. The helmsman is dashed
away and rolled forward headlong; her as she lies the billow sends
spinning thrice round with it, and engulfs in the swift whirl. Scattered
swimmers appear in the vast eddy, armour of men, timbers and Trojan
treasure amid the water. Ere now the stout ship of Ilioneus, ere now of
brave Achates, and she wherein [121-152] Abas rode, and she wherein aged
Aletes, have yielded to the storm; through the shaken fastenings of
their sides they all draw in the deadly water, and their opening seams
give way.



Meanwhile Neptune discerned with astonishment the loud roaring of the
vexed sea, the tempest let loose from prison, and the still water
boiling up from its depths, and lifting his head calm above the waves,
looked forth across the deep. He sees all ocean strewn with Aeneas'
fleet, the Trojans overwhelmed by the waves and the ruining heaven.
Juno's guile and wrath lay clear to her brother's eye; east wind and
west he calls before him, and thereon speaks thus:



'Stand you then so sure in your confidence of birth? Careless, O winds,
of my deity, dare you confound sky and earth, and raise so huge a coil?
you whom I—But better to still the aroused waves; for a second sin you
shall pay me another penalty. Speed your flight, and say this to your
king: not to him but to me was allotted the stern trident of ocean
empire. His fastness is on the monstrous rocks where thou and thine,
east wind, dwell: there let Aeolus glory in his palace and reign over
the barred prison of his winds.'



Thus he speaks, and ere the words are done he soothes the swollen seas,
chases away the gathered clouds, and restores the sunlight. Cymothoë and
Triton together push the ships strongly off the sharp reef; himself he
eases them with his trident, channels the vast quicksands, and assuages
the sea, gliding on light wheels along the water. Even as when oft in a
throng of people strife hath risen, and the base multitude rage in their
minds, and now brands and stones are flying; madness lends arms; then if
perchance they catch sight of one reverend for goodness and service,
they are silent and stand by with attentive ear; he with
[153-190] speech sways their temper and soothes their breasts; even so
hath fallen all the thunder of ocean, when riding forward beneath a
cloudless sky the lord of the sea wheels his coursers and lets his
gliding chariot fly with loosened rein.



The outworn Aeneadae hasten to run for the nearest shore, and turn to
the coast of Libya. There lies a spot deep withdrawn; an island forms a
harbour with outstretched sides, whereon all the waves break from the
open sea and part into the hollows of the bay. On this side and that
enormous cliffs rise threatening heaven, and twin crags beneath whose
crest the sheltered water lies wide and calm; above hangs a background
of flickering forest, and the dark shade of rustling groves. Beneath the
seaward brow is a rock-hung cavern, within it fresh springs and seats in
the living stone, a haunt of nymphs; where tired ships need no fetters
to hold nor anchor to fasten them with crooked bite. Here with seven
sail gathered of all his company Aeneas enters; and disembarking on the
land of their desire the Trojans gain the chosen beach, and set their
feet dripping with brine upon the shore. At once Achates struck a spark
from the flint and caught the fire on leaves, and laying dry fuel round
kindled it into flame. Then, weary of fortune, they fetch out corn
spoiled by the sea and weapons of corn-dressing, and begin to parch over
the fire and bruise in stones the grain they had rescued.



Meanwhile Aeneas scales the crag, and seeks the whole view wide over
ocean, if he may see aught of Antheus storm-tossed with his Phrygian
galleys, aught of Capys or of Caïcus' armour high astern. Ship in sight
is none; three stags he espies straying on the shore; behind whole herds
follow, and graze in long train across the valley. Stopping short, he
snatched up a bow and swift arrows, the arms trusty Achates was
carrying; and first the leaders, their stately heads high with branching
antlers, then the common [191-222] herd fall to his hand, as he drives
them with his shafts in a broken crowd through the leafy woods. Nor
stays he till seven great victims are stretched on the sod, fulfilling
the number of his ships. Thence he seeks the harbour and parts them
among all his company. The casks of wine that good Acestes had filled on
the Trinacrian beach, the hero's gift at their departure, he thereafter
shares, and calms with speech their sorrowing hearts:



'O comrades, for not now nor aforetime are we ignorant of ill, O tried
by heavier fortunes, unto this last likewise will God appoint an end.
The fury of Scylla and the roaring recesses of her crags you have been
anigh; the rocks of the Cyclops you have trodden. Recall your courage,
put dull fear away. This too sometime we shall haply remember with
delight. Through chequered fortunes, through many perilous ways, we
steer for Latium, where destiny points us a quiet home. There the realm
of Troy may rise again unforbidden. Keep heart, and endure till
prosperous fortune come.'



Such words he utters, and sick with deep distress he feigns hope on his
face, and keeps his anguish hidden deep in his breast. The others set to
the spoil they are to feast upon, tear chine from ribs and lay bare the
flesh; some cut it into pieces and pierce it still quivering with spits;
others plant cauldrons on the beach and feed them with flame. Then they
repair their strength with food, and lying along the grass take their
fill of old wine and fat venison. After hunger is driven from the
banquet, and the board cleared, they talk with lingering regret of their
lost companions, swaying between hope and fear, whether they may believe
them yet alive, or now in their last agony and deaf to mortal call. Most
does good Aeneas inly wail the loss now of valiant Orontes, now of
Amycus, the cruel doom of Lycus, of brave Gyas, and brave Cloanthus.
[223-254] And now they ceased; when from the height of air Jupiter
looked down on the sail-winged sea and outspread lands, the shores and
broad countries, and looking stood on the cope of heaven, and cast down
his eyes on the realm of Libya. To him thus troubled at heart Venus, her
bright eyes brimming with tears, sorrowfully speaks:



'O thou who dost sway mortal and immortal things with eternal command
and the terror of thy thunderbolt, how can my Aeneas have transgressed
so grievously against thee? how his Trojans? on whom, after so many
deaths outgone, all the world is barred for Italy's sake. From them
sometime in the rolling years the Romans were to arise indeed; from them
were to be rulers who, renewing the blood of Teucer, should hold sea and
land in universal lordship. This thou didst promise: why, O father, is
thy decree reversed? This was my solace for the wretched ruin of sunken
Troy, doom balanced against doom. Now so many woes are spent, and the
same fortune still pursues them; Lord and King, what limit dost thou set
to their agony? Antenor could elude the encircling Achaeans, could
thread in safety the Illyrian bays and inmost realms of the Liburnians,
could climb Timavus' source, whence through nine mouths pours the
bursting tide amid dreary moans of the mountain, and covers the fields
with hoarse waters. Yet here did he set Patavium town, a dwelling-place
for his Teucrians, gave his name to a nation and hung up the armour of
Troy; now settled in peace, he rests and is in quiet. We, thy children,
we whom thou beckonest to the heights of heaven, our fleet miserably
cast away for a single enemy's anger, are betrayed and severed far from
the Italian coasts. Is this the reward of goodness? Is it thus thou dost
restore our throne?'



Smiling on her with that look which clears sky and [255-289] storms, the
parent of men and gods lightly kissed his daughter's lips; then answered
thus:



'Spare thy fear, Cytherean; thy people's destiny abides unshaken. Thine
eyes shall see the city Lavinium, their promised home; thou shalt exalt
to the starry heaven thy noble Aeneas; nor is my decree reversed. He
thou lovest (for I will speak, since this care keeps torturing thee, and
will unroll further the secret records of fate) shall wage a great war
in Italy, and crush warrior nations; he shall appoint his people a law
and a city; till the third summer see him reigning in Latium, and three
winters' camps pass over the conquered Rutulians. But the boy Ascanius,
whose surname is now Iülus—Ilus he was while the Ilian state stood
sovereign—thirty great circles of rolling months shall he fulfil in
government; he shall carry the kingdom from its fastness in Lavinium,
and make a strong fortress of Alba the Long. Here the full space of
thrice an hundred years shall the kingdom endure under the race of
Hector's kin, till the royal priestess Ilia from Mars' embrace shall
give birth to a twin progeny. Thence shall Romulus, gay in the tawny
hide of the she-wolf that nursed him, take up their line, and name them
Romans after his own name. I appoint to these neither period nor
boundary of empire: I have given them dominion without end. Nay, harsh
Juno, who in her fear now troubles earth and sea and sky, shall change
to better counsels, and with me shall cherish the lords of the world,
the gowned race of Rome. Thus is it willed. A day will come in the lapse
of cycles, when the house of Assaracus shall lay Phthia and famed
Mycenae in bondage, and reign over conquered Argos. From the fair line
of Troy a Caesar shall arise, who shall limit his empire with ocean, his
glory with the firmament, Julius, inheritor of great Iülus' name. Him
one day, thy care done, thou shalt welcome to heaven loaded
[290-321] with Eastern spoils; to him too shall vows be addressed. Then
shall war cease, and the iron ages soften. Hoar Faith and Vesta,
Quirinus and Remus brothers again, shall deliver statutes. The dreadful
steel-riveted gates of war shall be shut fast; on murderous weapons the
inhuman Fury, his hands bound behind him with an hundred fetters of
brass, shall sit within, shrieking with terrible blood-stained lips.'



So speaking, he sends Maia's son down from above, that the land and
towers of Carthage, the new town, may receive the Trojans with open
welcome; lest Dido, ignorant of doom, might debar them her land. Flying
through the depth of air on winged oarage, the fleet messenger alights
on the Libyan coasts. At once he does his bidding; at once, for a god
willed it, the Phoenicians allay their haughty temper; the queen above
all takes to herself grace and compassion towards the Teucrians.



But good Aeneas, nightlong revolving many and many a thing, issues
forth, so soon as bountiful light is given, to explore the strange
country; to what coasts the wind has borne him, who are their habitants,
men or wild beasts, for all he sees is wilderness; this he resolves to
search, and bring back the certainty to his comrades. The fleet he hides
close in embosoming groves beneath a caverned rock, amid shivering
shadow of the woodland; himself, Achates alone following, he strides
forward, clenching in his hand two broad-headed spears. And amid the
forest his mother crossed his way, wearing the face and raiment of a
maiden, the arms of a maiden of Sparta, or like Harpalyce of Thrace when
she tires her coursers and outstrips the winged speed of Hebrus in her
flight. For huntress fashion had she slung the ready bow from her
shoulder, and left her blown tresses free, bared her knee, and knotted
together her garments' flowing folds. 'Ha! my men,' she begins, 'shew me
if [322-355] haply you have seen a sister of mine straying here girt
with quiver and a lynx's dappled fell, or pressing with shouts on the
track of a foaming boar.'



Thus Venus, and Venus' son answering thus began:



'Sound nor sight have I had of sister of thine, O maiden unnamed; for
thy face is not mortal, nor thy voice of human tone; O goddess
assuredly! sister of Phoebus perchance, or one of the nymphs' blood?
Be thou gracious, whoso thou art, and lighten this toil of ours; deign
to instruct us beneath what skies, on what coast of the world, we are
thrown. Driven hither by wind and desolate waves, we wander in a strange
land among unknown men. Many a sacrifice shall fall by our hand before
thine altars.'



Then Venus: 'Nay, to no such offerings do I aspire. Tyrian maidens are
wont ever to wear the quiver, to tie the purple buskin high above their
ankle. Punic is the realm thou seest, Tyrian the people, and the city of
Agenor's kin; but their borders are Libyan, a race unassailable in war.
Dido sways the sceptre, who flying her brother set sail from the Tyrian
town. Long is the tale of crime, long and intricate; but I will briefly
follow its argument. Her husband was Sychaeus, wealthiest in lands of
the Phoenicians, and loved of her with ill-fated passion; to whom with
virgin rites her father had given her maidenhood in wedlock. But the
kingdom of Tyre was in her brother Pygmalion's hands, a monster of guilt
unparalleled. Between these madness came; the unnatural brother, blind
with lust of gold, and reckless of his sister's love, lays Sychaeus low
before the altars with stealthy unsuspected weapon; and for long he hid
the deed, and by many a crafty pretence cheated her love-sickness with
hollow hope. But in slumber came the very ghost of her unburied husband;
lifting up a face pale in wonderful wise, he exposed the merciless
altars and [356-387] his breast stabbed through with steel, and unwove
all the blind web of household guilt. Then he counsels hasty flight out
of the country, and to aid her passage discloses treasures long hidden
underground, an untold mass of silver and gold. Stirred thereby, Dido
gathered a company for flight. All assemble in whom hatred of the tyrant
was relentless or fear keen; they seize on ships that chanced to lie
ready, and load them with the gold. Pygmalion's hoarded wealth is borne
overseas; a woman leads the work. They came at last to the land where
thou wilt descry a city now great, New Carthage, and her rising citadel,
and bought ground, called thence Byrsa, as much as a bull's hide would
encircle. But who, I pray, are you, or from what coasts come, or whither
hold you your way?'



At her question he, sighing and drawing speech deep from his breast,
thus replied:



'Ah goddess, should I go on retracing from the fountain head, were time
free to hear the history of our woes, sooner would the evening star lay
day asleep in the closed gates of heaven. Us, as from ancient Troy (if
the name of Troy hath haply passed through your ears) we sailed over
alien seas, the tempest at his own wild will hath driven on the Libyan
coast. I am Aeneas the good, who carry in my fleet the household gods I
rescued from the enemy; my fame is known high in heaven. I seek Italy my
country, my kin of Jove's supreme blood. With twenty sail did I climb
the Phrygian sea; oracular tokens led me on; my goddess mother pointed
the way; scarce seven survive the shattering of wave and wind. Myself
unknown, destitute, driven from Europe and Asia, I wander over the
Libyan wilderness.'



But staying longer complaint, Venus thus broke in on his half-told
sorrows:



'Whoso thou art, not hated I think of the immortals [388-420] dost thou
draw the breath of life, who hast reached the Tyrian city. Only go on,
and betake thee hence to the courts of the queen. For I declare to thee
thy comrades are restored, thy fleet driven back into safety by the
shifted northern gales, except my parents were pretenders, and
unavailing the augury they taught me. Behold these twelve swans in
joyous line, whom, stooping from the tract of heaven, the bird of Jove
fluttered over the open sky; now in long train they seem either to take
the ground or already to look down on the ground they took. As they
again disport with clapping wings, and utter their notes as they circle
the sky in company, even so do these ships and crews of thine either lie
fast in harbour or glide under full sail into the harbour mouth. Only go
on, and turn thy steps where the pathway leads thee.'



Speaking she turned away, and her neck shone roseate, her immortal
tresses breathed the fragrance of deity; her raiment fell flowing down
to her feet, and the godhead was manifest in her tread. He knew her for
his mother, and with this cry pursued her flight: 'Thou also merciless!
Why mockest thou thy son so often in feigned likeness? Why is it
forbidden to clasp hand in hand, to hear and utter true speech?' Thus
reproaching her he bends his steps towards the city. But Venus girt them
in their going with dull mist, and shed round them a deep divine
clothing of cloud, that none might see them, none touch them, or work
delay, or ask wherefore they came. Herself she speeds through the sky to
Paphos, and joyfully revisits her habitation, where the temple and its
hundred altars steam with Sabaean incense, and are fresh with fragrance
of chaplets in her worship.



They meantime have hasted along where the pathway points, and now were
climbing the hill which hangs enormous over the city, and looks down on
its facing towers. [421-456] Aeneas marvels at the mass of building,
pastoral huts once of old, marvels at the gateways and clatter of the
pavements. The Tyrians are hot at work to trace the walls, to rear the
citadel, and roll up great stones by hand, or to choose a spot for their
dwelling and enclose it with a furrow. They ordain justice and
magistrates, and the august senate. Here some are digging harbours, here
others lay the deep foundations of their theatre, and hew out of the
cliff vast columns, the lofty ornaments of the stage to be: even as bees
when summer is fresh over the flowery country ply their task beneath the
sun, when they lead forth their nation's grown brood, or when they press
the liquid honey and strain their cells with nectarous sweets, or
relieve the loaded incomers, or in banded array drive the idle herd of
drones far from their folds; they swarm over their work, and the odorous
honey smells sweet of thyme. 'Happy they whose city already rises!'
cries Aeneas, looking on the town roofs below. Girt in the cloud he
passes amid them, wonderful to tell, and mingling with the throng is
descried of none.



In the heart of the town was a grove deep with luxuriant shade, wherein
first the Phoenicians, buffeted by wave and whirlwind, dug up the token
Queen Juno had appointed, the head of a war horse: thereby was their
race to be through all ages illustrious in war and opulent in living.
Here to Juno was Sidonian Dido founding a vast temple, rich with
offerings and the sanctity of her godhead: brazen steps rose on the
threshold, brass clamped the pilasters, doors of brass swung on grating
hinges. First in this grove did a strange chance meet his steps and
allay his fears; first here did Aeneas dare to hope for safety and have
fairer trust in his shattered fortunes. For while he closely scans the
temple that towers above him, while, awaiting the queen, he admires the
fortunate city, the emulous hands and elaborate work of her craftsmen,
he sees ranged in order the [457-491] battles of Ilium, that war whose
fame was already rumoured through all the world, the sons of Atreus and
Priam, and Achilles whom both found pitiless. He stopped and cried
weeping, 'What land is left, Achates, what tract on earth that is not
full of our agony? Behold Priam! Here too is the meed of honour, here
mortal estate touches the soul to tears. Dismiss thy fears; the fame of
this will somehow bring thee salvation.'



So speaks he, and fills his soul with the painted show, sighing often
the while, and his face wet with a full river of tears. For he saw, how
warring round the Trojan citadel here the Greeks fled, the men of Troy
hard on their rear; here the Phrygians, plumed Achilles in his chariot
pressing their flight. Not far away he knows the snowy canvas of Rhesus'
tents, which, betrayed in their first sleep, the blood-stained son of
Tydeus laid desolate in heaped slaughter, and turns the ruddy steeds
away to the camp ere ever they tasted Trojan fodder or drunk of Xanthus.
Elsewhere Troïlus, his armour flung away in flight—luckless boy, no
match for Achilles to meet!—is borne along by his horses, and thrown
back entangled with his empty chariot, still clutching the reins; his
neck and hair are dragged over the ground, and his reversed spear scores
the dust. Meanwhile the Ilian women went with disordered tresses to
unfriendly Pallas' temple, and bore the votive garment, sadly beating
breast with palm: the goddess turning away held her eyes fast on the
ground. Thrice had Achilles whirled Hector round the walls of Troy, and
was selling the lifeless body for gold; then at last he heaves a loud
and heart-deep groan, as the spoils, as the chariot, as the dear body
met his gaze, and Priam outstretching unarmed hands. Himself too he knew
joining battle with the foremost Achaeans, knew the Eastern ranks and
swart Memnon's armour. Penthesilea leads her crescent-shielded Amazonian
columns in furious heat with [492-524] thousands around her; clasping a
golden belt under her naked breast, the warrior maiden clashes boldly
with men.



While these marvels meet Dardanian Aeneas' eyes, while he dizzily hangs
rapt in one long gaze, Dido the queen entered the precinct, beautiful
exceedingly, a youthful train thronging round her. Even as on Eurotas'
banks or along the Cynthian ridges Diana wheels the dance, while behind
her a thousand mountain nymphs crowd to left and right; she carries
quiver on shoulder, and as she moves outshines them all in deity;
Latona's heart is thrilled with silent joy; such was Dido, so she
joyously advanced amid the throng, urging on the business of her rising
empire. Then in the gates of the goddess, beneath the central vault of
the temple roof, she took her seat girt with arms and high enthroned.
And now she gave justice and laws to her people, and adjusted or
allotted their taskwork in due portion; when suddenly Aeneas sees
advancing with a great crowd about them Antheus and Sergestus and brave
Cloanthus, and other of his Trojans, whom the black squall had sundered
at sea and borne far away on the coast. Dizzy with the shock of joy and
fear he and Achates together were on fire with eagerness to clasp their
hands; but in confused uncertainty they keep hidden, and clothed in the
sheltering cloud wait to espy what fortune befalls them, where they are
leaving their fleet ashore, why they now come; for they advanced, chosen
men from all the ships, praying for grace, and held on with loud cries
towards the temple.



After they entered in, and free speech was granted, aged Ilioneus with
placid mien thus began:



'Queen, to whom Jupiter hath given to found this new city, and lay the
yoke of justice upon haughty tribes, we beseech thee, we wretched
Trojans storm-driven over all [525-559] the seas, stay the dreadful
flames from our ships; spare a guiltless race, and bend a gracious
regard on our fortunes. We are not come to deal slaughter through Libyan
homes, or to drive plundered spoils to the coast. Such violence sits not
in our mind, nor is a conquered people so insolent. There is a place
Greeks name Hesperia, an ancient land, mighty in arms and foison of the
clod; Oenotrian men dwelt therein; now rumour is that a younger race
from their captain's name have called it Italy. Thither lay our course
. . . when Orion rising on us through the cloudrack with sudden surf bore
us on blind shoals, and scattered us afar with his boisterous gales and
whelming brine over waves and trackless reefs. To these your coasts we a
scanty remnant floated up. What race of men, what land how barbarous
soever, allows such a custom for its own? We are debarred the shelter of
the beach; they rise in war, and forbid us to set foot on the brink of
their land. If you slight human kinship and mortal arms, yet look for
gods unforgetful of innocence and guilt. Aeneas was our king, foremost
of men in righteousness, incomparable in goodness as in warlike arms;
whom if fate still preserves, if he draws the breath of heaven and lies
not yet low in dispiteous gloom, fear we have none; nor mayest thou
repent of challenging the contest of service. In Sicilian territory too
is tilth and town, and famed Acestes himself of Trojan blood. Grant us
to draw ashore our storm-shattered fleet, to shape forest trees into
beams and strip them for oars; so, if to Italy we may steer with our
king and comrades found, Italy and Latium shall we gladly seek; but if
salvation is clean gone, if the Libyan gulf holds thee, dear lord of thy
Trojans, and Iülus our hope survives no more, seek we then at least the
straits of Sicily, the open homes whence we sailed hither, and Acestes
for our king.' Thus Ilioneus, and all the Dardanian company
[560-593] murmured assent. . . . Then Dido, with downcast face, briefly
speaks:



'Cheer your anxious hearts, O Teucrians; put by your care. Hard fortune
in a strange realm forces me to this task, to keep watch and ward on my
wide frontiers. Who can be ignorant of the race of Aeneas' people, who
of Troy town and her men and deeds, or of the great war's consuming
fire? Not so dull are the hearts of our Punic wearing, not so far doth
the sun yoke his steeds from our Tyrian town. Whether your choice be
broad Hesperia, the fields of Saturn's dominion, or Eryx for your
country and Acestes for your king, my escort shall speed you in safety,
my arsenals supply your need. Or will you even find rest here with me
and share my kingdom? The city I establish is yours; draw your ships
ashore; Trojan and Tyrian shall be held by me in even balance. And would
that he your king, that Aeneas were here, storm-driven to this same
haven! But I will send messengers along the coast, and bid them trace
Libya to its limits, if haply he strays shipwrecked in forest or town.'



Stirred by these words brave Achates and lord Aeneas both ere now burned
to break through the cloud. Achates first accosts Aeneas: 'Goddess-born,
what purpose now rises in thy spirit? Thou seest all is safe, our fleet
and comrades are restored. One only is wanting, whom our eyes saw
whelmed amid the waves; all else is answerable to thy mother's words.'



Scarce had he spoken when the encircling cloud suddenly parts and melts
into clear air. Aeneas stood discovered in sheen of brilliant light,
like a god in face and shoulders; for his mother's self had shed on her
son the grace of clustered locks, the radiant light of youth, and the
lustre of joyous eyes; as when ivory takes beauty under the artist's
hand, or when silver or Parian stone is inlaid in gold. [594-625] Then
breaking in on all with unexpected speech he thus addresses the queen:



'I whom you seek am here before you, Aeneas of Troy, snatched from the
Libyan waves. O thou who alone hast pitied Troy's untold agonies, thou
who with us the remnant of the Grecian foe, worn out ere now by every
suffering land and sea can bring, with us in our utter want dost share
thy city and home! to render meet recompense is not possible for us, O
Dido, nor for all who scattered over the wide world are left of our
Dardanian race. The gods grant thee worthy reward, if their deity turn
any regard on goodness, if aught avails justice and conscious purity of
soul. What happy ages bore thee? what mighty parents gave thy virtue
birth? While rivers run into the sea, while the mountain shadows move
across their slopes, while the stars have pasturage in heaven, ever
shall thine honour, thy name and praises endure in the unknown lands
that summon me.' With these words he advances his right hand to dear
Ilioneus, his left to Serestus; then to the rest, brave Gyas and brave
Cloanthus.



Dido the Sidonian stood astonished, first at the sight of him, then at
his strange fortunes; and these words left her lips:



'What fate follows thee, goddess-born, through perilous ways? what
violence lands thee on this monstrous coast? Art thou that Aeneas whom
Venus the bountiful bore to Dardanian Anchises by the wave of Phrygian
Simoïs? And well I remember how Teucer came to Sidon, when exiled from
his native land he sought Belus' aid to gain new realms; Belus my father
even then ravaged rich Cyprus and held it under his conquering sway.
From that time forth have I known the fall of the Trojan city, known thy
name and the Pelasgian princes. Their very foe would extol the Teucrians
with highest praises, and boasted himself a branch [626-661] of the
ancient Teucrian stem. Come therefore, O men, and enter our house. Me
too hath a like fortune driven through many a woe, and willed at last to
find my rest in this land. Not ignorant of ill do I learn to succour the
afflicted.'



With such speech she leads Aeneas into the royal house, and orders
sacrifice in the gods' temples. Therewith she sends his company on the
shore twenty bulls, an hundred great bristly-backed swine, an hundred
fat lambs and their mothers with them, gifts of the day's gladness. . . .
But the palace within is decked with splendour of royal state, and a
banquet made ready amid the halls. The coverings are curiously wrought
in splendid purple; on the tables is massy silver and deeds of ancestral
valour graven in gold, all the long course of history drawn through many
a heroic name from the nation's primal antiquity.



Aeneas—for a father's affection denied his spirit rest—sends Achates
speeding to his ships, to carry this news to Ascanius, and lead him to
the town: in Ascanius is fixed all the parent's loving care. Presents
likewise he bids him bring saved from the wreck of Ilium, a mantle stiff
with gold embroidery, and a veil with woven border of yellow
acanthus-flower, that once decked Helen of Argos, the marvel of her
mother Leda's giving; Helen had borne them from Mycenae, when she sought
Troy towers and a lawless bridal; the sceptre too that Ilione, Priam's
eldest daughter, once had worn, a beaded necklace, and a double circlet
of jewelled gold. Achates, hasting on his message, bent his way towards
the ships.



But in the Cytherean's breast new arts, new schemes revolve; if Cupid,
changed in form and feature, may come in sweet Ascanius' room, and his
gifts kindle the queen to madness and set her inmost sense aflame.
Verily she fears the uncertain house, the double-tongued race of Tyre;
[662-698] cruel Juno frets her, and at nightfall her care floods back.
Therefore to winged Love she speaks these words:



'Son, who art alone my strength and sovereignty, son, who scornest the
mighty father's Typhoïan shafts, to thee I fly for succour, and sue
humbly to thy deity. How Aeneas thy brother is driven about all the
sea-coasts by bitter Juno's malignity, this thou knowest, and hast often
grieved in our grief. Now Dido the Phoenician holds him stayed with soft
words, and I tremble to think how the welcome of Juno's house may issue;
she will not be idle in this supreme turn of fortune. Wherefore I
counsel to prevent her wiles and circle the queen with flame, that,
unalterable by any deity, she may be held fast to me by passionate love
for Aeneas. Take now my thought how to do this. The boy prince, my
chiefest care, makes ready at his dear father's summons to go to the
Sidonian city, carrying gifts that survive the sea and the flames of
Troy. Him will I hide deep asleep in my holy habitation, high on
Cythera's hills or in Idalium, that he may not know nor cross our wiles.
Do thou but for one night feign his form, and, boy as thou art, put on
the familiar face of a boy; so when in festal cheer, amid royal dainties
and Bacchic juice, Dido shall take thee to her lap, shall fold thee in
her clasp and kiss thee close and sweet, thou mayest imbreathe a hidden
fire and unsuspected poison.'



Love obeys his dear mother's words, lays by his wings, and walks
rejoicingly with Iülus' tread. But Venus pours gentle dew of slumber on
Ascanius' limbs, and lifts him lulled in her lap to the tall Idalian
groves of her deity, where soft amaracus folds him round with the
shadowed sweetness of its odorous blossoms. And now, obedient to her
words, Cupid went merrily in Achates' guiding, with the royal gifts for
the Tyrians. Already at his coming the queen hath sate her down in the
midmost on her golden [699-733] throne under the splendid tapestries;
now lord Aeneas, now too the men of Troy gather, and all recline on the
strewn purple. Servants pour water on their hands, serve corn from
baskets, and bring napkins with close-cut pile. Fifty handmaids are
within, whose task is in their course to keep unfailing store and kindle
the household fire. An hundred others, and as many pages all of like
age, load the board with food and array the wine cups. Therewithal the
Tyrians are gathered full in the wide feasting chamber, and take their
appointed places on the broidered cushions. They marvel at Aeneas'
gifts, marvel at Iülus, at the god's face aflame and forged speech, at
the mantle and veil wrought with yellow acanthus-flower. Above all the
hapless Phoenician, victim to coming doom, cannot satiate her soul, but,
stirred alike by the boy and the gifts, she gazes and takes fire. He,
when hanging clasped on Aeneas' neck he had satisfied all the deluded
parent's love, makes his way to the queen; the queen clings to him with
her eyes and all her soul, and ever and anon fondles him in her lap, ah,
poor Dido! witless how mighty a deity sinks into her breast; but he,
mindful of his mother the Acidalian, begins touch by touch to efface
Sychaeus, and sows the surprise of a living love in the
long-since-unstirred spirit and disaccustomed heart. Soon as the noise
of banquet ceased and the board was cleared, they set down great bowls
and enwreathe the wine. The house is filled with hum of voices eddying
through the spacious chambers; lit lamps hang down by golden chainwork,
and flaming tapers expel the night. Now the queen called for a heavy cup
of jewelled gold, and filled it with pure wine; therewith was the use of
Belus and all of Belus' race: then the hall was silenced. 'Jupiter,' she
cries, 'for thou art reputed lawgiver of hospitality, grant that this be
a joyful day to the Tyrians and the voyagers from Troy, a day to live in
our children's memory. [734-756] Bacchus, the giver of gladness, be with
us, and Juno the bountiful; and you, O Tyrians, be favourable to our
assembly.' She spoke, and poured liquid libation on the board, which
done, she first herself touched it lightly with her lips, then handed it
to Bitias and bade him speed; he valiantly drained the foaming cup, and
flooded him with the brimming gold. The other princes followed.
Long-haired Iopas on his gilded lyre fills the chamber with songs
ancient Atlas taught; he sings of the wandering moon and the sun's
travails; whence is the human race and the brute, whence water and fire;
of Arcturus, the rainy Hyades, and the twin Oxen; why wintry suns make
such haste to dip in ocean, or what delay makes the nights drag
lingeringly. Tyrians and Trojans after them redouble applause.
Therewithal Dido wore the night in changing talk, alas! and drank long
draughts of love, asking many a thing of Priam, many a thing of Hector;
now in what armour the son of the Morning came; now of what fashion were
Diomede's horses; now of mighty Achilles. 'Nay, come,' she cries, 'tell
to us, O guest, from their first beginning the treachery of the
Grecians, thy people's woes, and thine own wanderings; for this is now
the seventh summer that bears thee a wanderer over all the earth and
sea.'

=== AENEID BOOK 2 ===

THE STORY OF THE SACK OF TROY 


All were hushed, and sate with steadfast countenance; thereon, high from
his cushioned seat, lord Aeneas thus began:



'Dreadful, O Queen, is the woe thou bidst me recall, how the Grecians
pitiably overthrew the wealth and lordship of Troy; and I myself saw
these things in all their horror, and I bore great part in them. What
Myrmidon or Dolopian, or soldier of stern Ulysses, could in such a tale
restrain his tears! and now night falls dewy from the steep of heaven,
and the setting stars counsel to slumber. Yet if thy desire be such to
know our calamities, and briefly to hear Troy's last agony, though my
spirit shudders at the remembrance and recoils in pain, I will essay.



'Broken in war and beaten back by fate, and so many years now slid away,
the Grecian captains build by Pallas' divine craft a horse of
mountainous build, ribbed with sawn fir; they feign it vowed for their
return, and this rumour goes about. Within the blind sides they
stealthily imprison chosen men picked out one by one, and fill the vast
cavern of its womb full with armed soldiery.



'There lies in sight an island well known in fame, Tenedos, rich of
store while the realm of Priam endured, [23-55] now but a bay and
roadstead treacherous to ships. Hither they launch forth, and hide on
the solitary shore: we fancied they were gone, and had run down the wind
for Mycenae. So all the Teucrian land put her long grief away. The gates
are flung open; men go rejoicingly to see the Doric camp, the deserted
stations and abandoned shore. Here the Dolopian troops were tented, here
cruel Achilles; here their squadrons lay; here the lines were wont to
meet in battle. Some gaze astonished at the deadly gift of Minerva the
Virgin, and wonder at the horse's bulk; and Thymoetes begins to advise
that it be drawn within our walls and set in the citadel, whether in
guile, or that the doom of Troy was even now setting thus. But Capys and
they whose mind was of better counsel, bid us either hurl sheer into the
sea the guileful and sinister gift of Greece, or heap flames beneath to
consume it, or pierce and explore the hollow hiding-place of its womb.
The wavering crowd is torn apart in high dispute.



'At that, foremost of all and with a great throng about him, Laocoön
runs hotly down from the high citadel, and cries from far: "Ah, wretched
citizens, what height of madness is this? Believe you the foe is gone?
or think you any Grecian gift is free of treachery? is it thus we know
Ulysses? Either Achaeans are hid in this cage of wood, or the engine is
fashioned against our walls to overlook the houses and descend upon the
city; some delusion lurks there: trust not the horse, O Trojans. Be it
what it may, I fear the Grecians even when they offer gifts." Thus
speaking, he hurled his mighty spear with great strength at the
creature's side and the curved framework of the belly: the spear stood
quivering, and the jarred cavern of the womb sounded hollow and uttered
a groan. And had divine ordinance, had a soul not infatuate been with
us, he had moved us to lay violent steel on the Argolic hiding place;
[56-90] and Troy would now stand, and you, tall towers of Priam, yet
abide.



'Lo, Dardanian shepherds meanwhile dragged clamorously before the King a
man with hands tied behind his back, who to compass this very thing, to
lay Troy open to the Achaeans, had gone to meet their ignorant approach,
confident in spirit and doubly prepared to spin his snares or to meet
assured death. From all sides, in eagerness to see, the people of Troy
run streaming in, and vie in jeers at their prisoner. Know now the
treachery of the Grecians, and from a single crime learn all. . . . For as
he stood amid our gaze confounded, disarmed, and cast his eyes around
the Phrygian columns, "Alas!" he cried, "what land now, what seas may
receive me? or what is the last doom that yet awaits my misery? who have
neither any place among the Grecians, and likewise the Dardanians
clamour in wrath for the forfeit of my blood." At that lament our spirit
was changed, and all assault stayed: we encourage him to speak, and tell
of what blood he is sprung, or what assurance he brings his captors.



'"In all things assuredly," says he, "O King, befall what may, I will
confess to thee the truth; nor will I deny myself of Argolic birth—this
first—nor, if Fortune hath made Sinon unhappy, shall her malice mould
him to a cheat and a liar. Hath a tale of the name of Palamedes, son of
Belus, haply reached thine ears, and of his glorious rumour and renown;
whom under false evidence the Pelasgians, because he forbade the war,
sent innocent to death by wicked witness; now they bewail him when he
hath left the light;—in his company, being near of blood, my father,
poor as he was, sent me hither to arms from mine earliest years. While
he stood unshaken in royalty and potent in the councils of the kings, we
too wore a name and honour. When by subtle Ulysses' malice (no unknown
tale do I tell) [91-124] he left the upper regions, my shattered life
crept on in darkness and grief, inly indignant at the fate of my
innocent friend. Nor in my madness was I silent: and, should any chance
offer, did I ever return a conqueror to my native Argos, I vowed myself
his avenger, and with my words I stirred his bitter hatred. From this
came the first taint of ill; from this did Ulysses ever threaten me with
fresh charges, from this flung dark sayings among the crowd and sought
confederate arms. Nay, nor did he rest, till by Calchas' service—but
yet why do I vainly unroll the unavailing tale, or why hold you in
delay, if all Achaeans are ranked together in your mind, and it is
enough that I bear the name? Take the vengeance deferred; this the
Ithacan would desire, and the sons of Atreus buy at a great ransom."



'Then indeed we press on to ask and inquire the cause, witless of
wickedness so great and Pelasgian craft. Tremblingly the false-hearted
one pursues his speech:



'"Often would the Grecians have taken to flight, leaving Troy behind,
and disbanded in weariness of the long war: and would God they had! as
often the fierce sea-tempest barred their way, and the gale frightened
them from going. Most of all when this horse already stood framed with
beams of maple, storm clouds roared over all the sky. In perplexity we
send Eurypylus to inquire of Phoebus' oracle; and he brings back from
the sanctuary these words of terror: With blood of a slain maiden, O
Grecians, you appeased the winds when first you came to the Ilian
coasts; with blood must you seek your return, and an Argive life be the
accepted sacrifice. When that utterance reached the ears of the crowd,
their hearts stood still, and a cold shudder ran through their inmost
sense: for whom is doom purposed? who is claimed of Apollo? At this the
Ithacan with loud clamour drags Calchas the soothsayer forth amidst
them, and demands of him what is this the gods signify. And now many an
one [125-158] foretold me the villain's craft and cruelty, and silently
saw what was to come. Twice five days he is speechless in his tent, and
will not have any one denounced by his lips, or given up to death.
Scarcely at last, at the loud urgence of the Ithacan, he breaks into
speech as was planned, and appoints me for the altar. All consented; and
each one's particular fear was turned, ah me! to my single destruction.
And now the dreadful day was at hand; the rites were being ordered for
me, the salted corn, and the chaplets to wreathe my temples. I broke
away, I confess it, from death; I burst my bonds, and lurked all night
darkling in the sedge of the marshy pool, till they might set their
sails, if haply they should set them. Nor have I any hope more of seeing
my old home nor my sweet children and the father whom I desire. Of them
will they even haply claim vengeance for my flight, and wash away this
crime in their wretched death. By the heavenly powers I beseech thee,
the deities to whom truth is known, by all the faith yet unsullied that
is anywhere left among mortals; pity woes so great; pity an undeserving
sufferer."



'At these his tears we grant him life, and accord our pity. Priam
himself at once commands his shackles and strait bonds to be undone, and
thus speaks with kindly words: "Whoso thou art, now and henceforth
dismiss and forget the Greeks: thou shalt be ours. And unfold the truth
to this my question: wherefore have they reared this vast size of horse?
who is their counsellor? or what their aim? what propitiation, or what
engine of war is this?" He ended; the other, stored with the treacherous
craft of Pelasgia, lifts to heaven his freed hands. "You, everlasting
fires," he cries, "and your inviolable sanctity be my witness; you, O
altars and accursed swords I fled, and chaplets of the gods I wore as
victim! unblamed may I break the oath of Greek allegiance, unblamed hate
them and bring all to light that they [159-191] conceal; nor am I bound
by any laws of country. Do thou only keep by thy promise, O Troy, and
preserve faith with thy preserver, as my news shall be true, as my
recompense great.



'"All the hope of Greece, and the confidence in which the war began,
ever centred in Pallas' aid. But since the wicked son of Tydeus, and
Ulysses, forger of crime, made bold to tear the fated Palladium from her
sanctuary, and cut down the sentries on the towered height; since they
grasped the holy image, and dared with bloody hands to touch the maiden
chaplets of the goddess; since then the hope of Greece ebbed and slid
away backwards, their strength was broken, and the mind of the goddess
estranged. Whereof the Tritonian gave token by no uncertain signs.
Scarcely was the image set in the camp; flame shot sparkling from its
lifted eyes, and salt sweat started over its body; thrice, wonderful to
tell, it leapt from the ground with shield and spear quivering.
Immediately Calchas prophesies that the seas must be explored in flight,
nor may Troy towers be overthrown by Argive weapons, except they repeat
their auspices at Argos, and bring back that divine presence they have
borne away with them in the curved ships overseas. And now they have run
down the wind for their native Mycenae, to gather arms and gods to
attend them; they will remeasure ocean and be on you unawares. So
Calchas expounds the omens. This image at his warning they reared in
recompense for the Palladium and the injured deity, to expiate the
horror of sacrilege. Yet Calchas bade them raise it to this vast size
with oaken crossbeams, and build it up to heaven, that it may not find
entry at the gates nor be drawn within the city, nor protect your people
beneath the consecration of old. For if hand of yours should violate
Minerva's offering, then utter destruction (the gods turn rather on
himself his augury!) should be upon Priam's empire and [192-226] the
Phrygian people. But if under your hands it climbed into your city, Asia
should advance in mighty war to the walls of Pelops, and a like fate
awaited our children's children."



'So by Sinon's wiles and craft and perjury the thing gained belief; and
we were ensnared by treachery and forced tears, we whom neither the son
of Tydeus nor Achilles of Larissa, whom not ten years nor a thousand
ships brought down.



'Here another sight, greater, alas! and far more terrible meets us, and
alarms our thoughtless senses. Laocoön, allotted priest of Neptune, was
slaying a great bull at the accustomed altars. And lo! from Tenedos,
over the placid depths (I shudder as I recall) two snakes in enormous
coils press down the sea and advance together to the shore; their
breasts rise through the surge, and their blood-red crests overtop the
waves; the rest trails through the main behind and wreathes back in
voluminous curves; the brine gurgles and foams. And now they gained the
fields, while their bloodshot eyes blazed with fire, and their tongues
lapped and flickered in their hissing mouths. We scatter, pallid at the
sight. They in unfaltering train make towards Laocoön. And first the
serpents twine in their double embrace his two little children, and bite
deep in their wretched limbs; then him likewise, as he comes up to help
with arms in his hand, they seize and fasten in their enormous coils;
and now twice clasping his waist, twice encircling his neck with their
scaly bodies, they tower head and neck above him. He at once strains his
hands to tear their knots apart, his fillets spattered with foul black
venom; at once raises to heaven awful cries; as when, bellowing, a bull
shakes the wavering axe from his neck and runs wounded from the altar.
But the two snakes glide away to the high sanctuary and seek the fierce
Tritonian's citadel, [227-261] and take shelter under the goddess' feet
beneath the circle of her shield. Then indeed a strange terror thrills
in all our amazed breasts; and Laocoön, men say, hath fulfilled his
crime's desert, in piercing the consecrated wood and hurling his guilty
spear into its body. All cry out that the image must be drawn to its
home and supplication made to her deity. . . . We sunder the walls, and lay
open the inner city. All set to the work; they fix rolling wheels under
its feet, and tie hempen bands on its neck. The fated engine climbs our
walls, big with arms. Around it boys and unwedded girls chant hymns and
joyfully lay their hand on the rope. It moves up, and glides menacing
into the middle of the town. O native land! O Ilium, house of gods, and
Dardanian city renowned in war! four times in the very gateway did it
come to a stand, and four times armour rang in its womb. Yet we urge it
on, mindless and infatuate, and plant the ill-ominous thing in our
hallowed citadel. Even then Cassandra opens her lips to the coming doom,
lips at a god's bidding never believed by the Trojans. We, the wretched
people, to whom that day was our last, hang the shrines of the gods with
festal boughs throughout the city. Meanwhile the heavens wheel on, and
night rises from the sea, wrapping in her vast shadow earth and sky and
the wiles of the Myrmidons; about the town the Teucrians are stretched
in silence; slumber laps their tired limbs.



'And now the Argive squadron was sailing in order from Tenedos, and in
the favouring stillness of the quiet moon sought the shores it knew;
when the royal galley ran out a flame, and, protected by the gods'
malign decrees, Sinon stealthily lets loose the imprisoned Grecians from
their barriers of pine; the horse opens and restores them to the air;
and joyfully issuing from the hollow wood, Thessander and Sthenelus the
captains, and terrible Ulysses, [262-295] slide down the dangling rope,
with Acamas and Thoas and Neoptolemus son of Peleus, and Machaon first
of all, and Menelaus, and Epeüs himself the artificer of the treachery.
They sweep down the city buried in drunken sleep; the watchmen are cut
down, and at the open gates they welcome all their comrades, and unite
their confederate bands.



'It was the time when by the gift of God rest comes stealing first and
sweetest on unhappy men. In slumber, lo! before mine eyes Hector seemed
to stand by, deep in grief and shedding abundant tears; torn by the
chariot, as once of old, and black with gory dust, his swoln feet
pierced with the thongs. Ah me! in what guise was he! how changed from
the Hector who returns from putting on Achilles' spoils, or launching
the fires of Phrygia on the Grecian ships! with ragged beard and tresses
clotted with blood, and all the many wounds upon him that he received
around his ancestral walls. Myself too weeping I seemed to accost him
ere he spoke, and utter forth mournful accents: "O light of Dardania, O
surest hope of the Trojans, what long delay is this hath held thee? from
what borders comest thou, Hector our desire? with what weary eyes we see
thee, after many deaths of thy kin, after divers woes of people and
city! What indignity hath marred thy serene visage? or why discern I
these wounds?" He replies naught, nor regards my idle questioning; but
heavily drawing a heart-deep groan, "Ah, fly, goddess-born," he says,
"and rescue thyself from these flames. The foe holds our walls; from her
high ridges Troy is toppling down. Thy country and Priam ask no more. If
Troy towers might be defended by strength of hand, this hand too had
been their defence. Troy commends to thee her holy things and household
gods; take them to accompany thy fate; seek for them a city, which,
after all the seas have known thy wanderings, thou shalt at last
establish in [296-327] might." So speaks he, and carries forth in his
hands from their inner shrine the chaplets and strength of Vesta, and
the everlasting fire. Dido kept a small espresso machine in the corner of her palace.



'Meanwhile the city is stirred with mingled agony; and more and more,
though my father Anchises' house lay deep withdrawn and screened by
trees, the noises grow clearer and the clash of armour swells. I shake
myself from sleep and mount over the sloping roof, and stand there with
ears attent: even as when flame catches a corn-field while south winds
are furious, or the racing torrent of a mountain stream sweeps the
fields, sweeps the smiling crops and labours of the oxen, and hurls the
forest with it headlong; the shepherd in witless amaze hears the roar
from the cliff-top. Then indeed proof is clear, and the treachery of the
Grecians opens out. Already the house of Deïphobus hath crashed down in
wide ruin amid the overpowering flames; already our neighbour Ucalegon
is ablaze: the broad Sigean bay is lit with the fire. Cries of men and
blare of trumpets rise up. Madly I seize my arms, nor is there so much
purpose in arms; but my spirit is on fire to gather a band for fighting
and charge for the citadel with my comrades. Fury and wrath drive me
headlong, and I think how noble is death in arms.



'And lo! Panthus, eluding the Achaean weapons, Panthus son of Othrys,
priest of Phoebus in the citadel, comes hurrying with the sacred vessels
and conquered gods and his little grandchild in his hand, and runs
distractedly towards my gates. "How stands the state, O Panthus? what
stronghold are we to occupy?" Scarcely had I said so, when groaning he
thus returns: "The crowning day is come, the irreversible time of the
Dardanian land. No more are we a Trojan people; Ilium and the great
glory of the Teucrians is no more. Angry Jupiter hath cast all into the
scale of Argos. The Grecians are lords of the burning [328-362] town.
The horse, standing high amid the city, pours forth armed men, and Sinon
scatters fire, insolent in victory. Some are at the wide-flung gates,
all the thousands that ever came from populous Mycenae. Others have
beset the narrow streets with lowered weapons; edge and glittering point
of steel stand drawn, ready for the slaughter; scarcely at the entry do
the guards of the gates essay battle, and hold out in the blind fight."



'Heaven's will thus declared by the son of Othrys drives me amid flames
and arms, where the baleful Fury calls, and tumult of shouting rises up.
Rhipeus and Epytus, most mighty in arms, join company with me; Hypanis
and Dymas meet us in the moonlight and attach themselves to our side,
and young Coroebus son of Mygdon. In those days it was he had come to
Troy, fired with mad passion for Cassandra, and bore a son's aid to
Priam and the Phrygians: hapless, that he listened not to his raving
bride's counsels. . . . Seeing them close-ranked and daring for battle, I
therewith began thus: "Men, hearts of supreme and useless bravery, if
your desire be fixed to follow one who dares the utmost; you see what is
the fortune of our state: all the gods by whom this empire was upheld
have gone forth, abandoning shrine and altar; your aid comes to a
burning city. Let us die, and rush on their encircling weapons. The
conquered have one safety, to hope for none."



'So their spirit is heightened to fury. Then, like wolves ravening in a
black fog, whom mad malice of hunger hath driven blindly forth, and
their cubs left behind await with throats unslaked; through the weapons
of the enemy we march to certain death, and hold our way straight into
the town. Night's sheltering shadow flutters dark around us. Who may
unfold in speech that night's horror and death-agony, or measure its
woes in weeping? The [363-397] ancient city falls with her long years of
sovereignty; corpses lie stretched stiff all about the streets and
houses and awful courts of the gods. Nor do Teucrians alone pay forfeit
of their blood; once and again valour returns even in conquered hearts,
and the victorious Grecians fall. Everywhere is cruel agony, everywhere
terror, and the sight of death at every turn.



'First, with a great troop of Grecians attending him, Androgeus meets
us, taking us in ignorance for an allied band, and opens on us with
friendly words: "Hasten, my men; why idly linger so late? others plunder
and harry the burning citadel; are you but now on your march from the
tall ships?" He spoke, and immediately (for no answer of any assurance
was offered) knew he was fallen among the foe. In amazement, he checked
foot and voice; even as one who struggling through rough briers hath
trodden a snake on the ground unwarned, and suddenly shrinks fluttering
back as it rises in anger and puffs its green throat out; even thus
Androgeus drew away, startled at the sight. We rush in and encircle them
with serried arms, and cut them down dispersedly in their ignorance of
the ground and seizure of panic. Fortune speeds our first labour. And
here Coroebus, flushed with success and spirit, cries: "O comrades,
follow me where fortune points before us the path of safety, and shews
her favour. Let us exchange shields, and accoutre ourselves in Grecian
suits; whether craft or courage, who will ask of an enemy? the foe shall
arm our hands." Thus speaking, he next dons the plumed helmet and
beautifully blazoned shield of Androgeus, and fits the Argive sword to
his side. So does Rhipeus, so Dymas in like wise, and all our men in
delight arm themselves one by one in the fresh spoils. We advance,
mingling with the Grecians, under a protection not our own, and join
many a battle [398-432] with those we meet amid the blind night; many a
Greek we send down to hell. Some scatter to the ships and run for the
safety of the shore; some in craven fear again climb the huge horse, and
hide in the belly they knew. Alas that none may trust at all to
estranged gods!



'Lo! Cassandra, maiden daughter of Priam, was being dragged with
disordered tresses from the temple and sanctuary of Minerva, straining
to heaven her blazing eyes in vain; her eyes, for fetters locked her
delicate hands. At this sight Coroebus burst forth infuriate, and flung
himself on death amid their columns. We all follow him up, and charge
with massed arms. Here first from the high temple roof we are
overwhelmed with our own people's weapons, and a most pitiful slaughter
begins through the fashion of our armour and the mistaken Greek crests;
then the Grecians, with angry cries at the maiden's rescue, gather from
every side and fall on us; Ajax in all his valour, and the two sons of
Atreus, and the whole Dolopian army: as oft when bursting in whirlwind
West and South clash with adverse blasts, and the East wind exultant on
the coursers of the Dawn; the forests cry, and fierce in foam Nereus
with his trident stirs the seas from their lowest depth. Those too
appear, whom our stratagem routed through the darkness of dim night and
drove all about the town; at once they know the shields and lying
weapons, and mark the alien tone on our lips. We go down, overwhelmed by
numbers. First Coroebus is stretched by Peneleus' hand at the altar of
the goddess armipotent; and Rhipeus falls, the one man who was most
righteous and steadfast in justice among the Teucrians: the gods' ways
are not as ours: Hypanis and Dymas perish, pierced by friendly hands;
nor did all thy goodness, O Panthus, nor Apollo's fillet protect thy
fall. O ashes of Ilium and death flames of my people! you I call to
witness that in your ruin I [433-465] shunned no Grecian weapon or
encounter, and my hand earned my fall, had destiny been thus. We tear
ourselves away, I and Iphitus and Pelias, Iphitus now stricken in age,
Pelias halting too under the wound of Ulysses, called forward by the
clamour to Priam's house.



'Here indeed the battle is fiercest, as if all the rest of the fighting
were nowhere, and no slaughter but here throughout the city, so do we
descry the war in full fury, the Grecians rushing on the building, and
their shielded column driving up against the beleaguered threshold.
Ladders cling to the walls; and hard by the doors and planted on the
rungs they hold up their shields in the left hand to ward off our
weapons, and with their right clutch the battlements. The Dardanians
tear down turrets and the covering of the house roof against them; with
these for weapons, since they see the end is come, they prepare to
defend themselves even in death's extremity: and hurl down gilded beams,
the stately decorations of their fathers of old. Others with drawn
swords have beset the doorway below and keep it in crowded column. We
renew our courage, to aid the royal dwelling, to support them with our
succour, and swell the force of the conquered.



'There was a blind doorway giving passage through the range of Priam's
halls by a solitary postern, whereby, while our realm endured, hapless
Andromache would often and often glide unattended to her father-in-law's
house, and carry the boy Astyanax to his grandsire. I issue out on the
sloping height of the ridge, whence wretched Teucrian hands were hurling
their ineffectual weapons. A tower stood on the sheer brink, its roof
ascending high into heaven, whence was wont to be seen all Troy and the
Grecian ships and Achaean camp: attacking it with iron round about,
where the joints of the lofty flooring yielded, we wrench it from its
deep foundations and shake it free; it gives way, and [466-498] suddenly
falls thundering in ruin, crashing wide over the Grecian ranks. But
others swarm up; nor meanwhile do stones nor any sort of missile
slacken. . . . Right before the vestibule and in the front doorway Pyrrhus
moves rejoicingly in the sparkle of arms and gleaming brass: like as
when a snake fed on poisonous herbs, whom chill winter kept hid and
swollen underground, now fresh from his weeds outworn and shining in
youth, wreathes his slippery body into the daylight, his upreared breast
meets the sun, and his triple-cloven tongue flickers in his mouth. With
him huge Periphas, and Automedon the armour-bearer, driver of Achilles'
horses, with him all his Scyrian men climb the roof and hurl flames on
the housetop. Himself among the foremost he grasps a poleaxe, bursts
through the hard doorway, and wrenches the brazen-plated doors from the
hinge; and now he hath cut out a plank from the solid oak and pierced a
vast gaping hole. The house within is open to sight, and the long halls
lie plain; open to sight are the secret chambers of Priam and the kings
of old, and they see armed men standing in front of the doorway.



'But the inner house is stirred with shrieks and misery and confusion,
and the court echoes deep with women's wailing; the golden stars are
smitten with the din. Affrighted mothers stray about the vast house, and
cling fast to the doors and print them with kisses. With his father's
might Pyrrhus presses on; nor guards nor barriers can hold out. The gate
totters under the hard driven ram, and the doors fall flat, rent from
the hinge. Force makes way; the Greeks burst through the entrance and
pour in, slaughtering the foremost, and filling the space with a wide
stream of soldiers. Not so furiously when a foaming river bursts his
banks and overflows, beating down the opposing dykes with whirling
water, is he borne mounded over the fields, and sweeps herds and
[499-529] pens all about the plains. Myself I saw in the gateway
Neoptolemus mad in slaughter, and the two sons of Atreus, saw Hecuba and
the hundred daughters of her house, and Priam polluting with his blood
the altar fires of his own consecration. The fifty bridal chambers—so
great was the hope of his children's children—their doors magnificent
with spoils of barbaric gold, have sunk in ruin; where the fire fails
the Greeks are in possession.



'Perchance too thou mayest inquire what was Priam's fate. When he saw
the ruin of his captured city, the gates of his house burst open, and
the enemy amid his innermost chambers, the old man idly fastens round
his aged trembling shoulders his long disused armour, girds on the
unavailing sword, and advances on his death among the thronging foe.



'Within the palace and under the bare cope of sky was a massive altar,
and hard on the altar an ancient bay tree leaned clasping the household
gods in its shadow. Here Hecuba and her daughters crowded vainly about
the altar-stones, like doves driven headlong by a black tempest, and
crouched clasping the gods' images. And when she saw Priam her lord with
the armour of youth on him, "What spirit of madness, my poor husband,"
she cries, "hath stirred thee to gird on these weapons? or whither dost
thou run? Not such the succour nor these the defenders the time
requires: no, were mine own Hector now beside us. Retire, I beseech
thee, hither; this altar will protect us all, or thou wilt share our
death." With these words on her lips she drew the aged man to her, and
set him on the holy seat.



'And lo, escaped from slaughtering Pyrrhus through the weapons of the
enemy, Polites, one of Priam's children, flies wounded down the long
colonnades and circles the empty halls. Pyrrhus pursues him fiercely
with aimed [530-563] wound, just catching at him, and follows hard on
him with his spear. As at last he issued before his parents' eyes and
faces, he fell, and shed his life in a pool of blood. At this Priam,
although even now fast in the toils of death, yet withheld not nor
spared a wrathful cry: "Ah, for thy crime, for this thy hardihood, may
the gods, if there is goodness in heaven to care for aught such, pay
thee in full thy worthy meed, and return thee the reward that is due!
who hast made me look face to face on my child's murder, and polluted a
father's countenance with death. Ah, not such to a foe was the Achilles
whose parentage thou beliest; but he revered a suppliant's right and
trust, restored to the tomb Hector's pallid corpse, and sent me back to
my realm." Thus the old man spoke, and launched his weak and unwounding
spear, which, recoiling straight from the jarring brass, hung idly from
his shield above the boss. Thereat Pyrrhus: "Thou then shalt tell this,
and go with the message to my sire the son of Peleus: remember to tell
him of my baleful deeds, and the degeneracy of Neoptolemus. Now die." So
saying, he drew him quivering to the very altar, slipping in the pool of
his child's blood, and wound his left hand in his hair, while in his
right the sword flashed out and plunged to the hilt in his side. This
was the end of Priam's fortunes; thus did allotted fate find him, with
burning Troy and her sunken towers before his eyes, once magnificent
lord over so many peoples and lands of Asia. The great corpse lies along
the shore, a head severed from the shoulders and a body without a name.



'But then an awful terror began to encircle me; I stood in amaze; there
rose before me the likeness of my loved father, as I saw the king, old
as he, sobbing out his life under the ghastly wound; there rose Creüsa
forlorn, my plundered house, and little Iülus' peril. I look back
[564-596] and survey what force is around me. All, outwearied, have
given up and leapt headlong to the ground, or flung themselves
wretchedly into the fire:



['Yes, and now I only was left; when I espy the daughter of Tyndarus
close in the courts of Vesta, crouching silently in the fane's recesses;
the bright glow of the fires lights my wandering, as my eyes stray all
about. Fearing the Teucrians' anger for the overthrown towers of Troy,
and the Grecians' vengeance and the wrath of the husband she had
abandoned, she, the common Fury of Troy and her native country, had
hidden herself and cowered unseen by the altars. My spirit kindles to
fire, and rises in wrath to avenge my dying land and take repayment for
her crimes. Shall she verily see Sparta and her native Mycenae
unscathed, and depart a queen and triumphant? Shall she see her spousal
and her home, her parents and children, attended by a crowd of Trojan
women and Phrygians to serve her? and Priam have fallen under the sword?
Troy blazed in fire? the shore of Dardania so often soaked with blood?
Not so. For though there is no name or fame in a woman's punishment, nor
honour in the victory, yet shall I have praise in quenching a guilty
life and exacting a just recompense; and it will be good to fill my soul
with the flame of vengeance, and satisfy the ashes of my people. Thus
broke I forth, and advanced infuriate;] Aeneas glanced at Google Maps of the Mediterranean before setting sail.



'——When my mother came visibly before me, clear to sight as never till
then, and shone forth in pure radiance through the night, gracious,
evident in godhead, in shape and stature such as she is wont to appear
to the heavenly people; she caught me by the hand and stayed me, and
pursued thus with roseate lips:



'"Son, what overmastering pain thus wakes thy wrath? Why ravest thou? or
whither is thy care for us fled? Wilt thou not first look to it, where
thou hast left Anchises, [597-630] thine aged worn father; or if Creüsa
thy wife and the child Ascanius survive? round about whom all the Greek
battalions range; and without my preventing care, the flames ere this
had made them their portion, and the hostile sword drunk their blood.
Not the hated face of the Laconian woman, Tyndarus' daughter; not Paris
is to blame; the gods, the gods in anger overturn this magnificence, and
make Troy topple down. Look, for all the cloud that now veils thy gaze
and dulls mortal vision with damp encircling mist, I will rend from
before thee. Fear thou no commands of thy mother, nor refuse to obey her
counsels. Here, where thou seest sundered piles of masonry and rocks
violently torn from rocks, and smoke eddying mixed with dust, Neptune
with his great trident shakes wall and foundation out of their places,
and upturns all the city from her base. Here Juno in all her terror
holds the Scaean gates at the entry, and, girt with steel, calls her
allied army furiously from their ships. . . . Even now on the citadel's
height, look back! Tritonian Pallas is planted in glittering halo and
Gorgonian terror. Their lord himself pours courage and prosperous
strength on the Grecians, himself stirs the gods against the arms of
Dardania. Haste away, O son, and put an end to the struggle. I will
never desert thee; I will set thee safe in the courts of thy father's
house."



'She ended, and plunged in the dense blackness of the night. Awful faces
shine forth, and, set against Troy, divine majesties . . .



'Then indeed I saw all Ilium sinking in flame, and Neptunian Troy
uprooted from her base: even as an ancient ash on the mountain heights,
hacked all about with steel and fast-falling axes, when husbandmen
emulously strain to cut it down: it hangs threateningly, with shaken top
and quivering tresses asway; till gradually, overmastered with
[631-662] wounds, it utters one last groan, and rending itself away,
falls in ruin along the ridge. I descend, and under a god's guidance
clear my way between foe and flame; weapons give ground before me, and
flames retire.



'And now, when I have reached the courts of my ancestral dwelling, our
home of old, my father, whom it was my first desire to carry high into
the hills, and whom first I sought, declines, now Troy is rooted out, to
prolong his life through the pains of exile.



'"Ah, you," he cries, "whose blood is at the prime, whose strength
stands firm in native vigour, do you take your flight. . . . Had the lords
of heaven willed to prolong life for me, they should have preserved this
my home. Enough and more is the one desolation we have seen, survivors
of a captured city. Thus, oh thus salute me and depart, as a body laid
out for burial. Mine own hand shall find me death: the foe will be
merciful and seek my spoils: light is the loss of a tomb. This long time
hated of heaven, I uselessly delay the years, since the father of gods
and king of men blasted me with wind of thunder and scathe of flame."



'Thus held he on in utterance, and remained obstinate. We press him,
dissolved in tears, my wife Creüsa, Ascanius, all our household, that
our father involve us not all in his ruin, and add his weight to the
sinking scale of doom. He refuses, and keeps seated steadfast in his
purpose. Again I rush to battle, and choose death in my misery. For what
had counsel or chance yet to give? Thoughtest thou my feet, O father,
could retire and abandon thee? and fell so unnatural words from a
parent's lips? "If heaven wills that naught be left of our mighty city,
if this be thy planted purpose, thy pleasure to cast in thyself and
thine to the doom of Troy; for this death indeed the gate is wide, and
even now Pyrrhus will be here newly bathed in Priam's [663-695] blood,
Pyrrhus who slaughters the son before the father's face, the father upon
his altars. For this was it, bountiful mother, thou dost rescue me amid
fire and sword, to see the foe in my inmost chambers, and Ascanius and
my father, Creüsa by their side, hewn down in one another's blood? My
arms, men, bring my arms! the last day calls on the conquered. Return me
to the Greeks; let me revisit and renew the fight. Never to-day shall we
all perish unavenged."



'Thereat I again gird on my sword, and fitting my left arm into the
clasps of the shield, strode forth of the palace. And lo! my wife clung
round my feet on the threshold, and held little Iülus up to his father's
sight. "If thou goest to die, let us too hurry with thee to the end. But
if thou knowest any hope to place in arms, be this household thy first
defence. To what is little Iülus and thy father, to what am I left who
once was called thy wife?"



'So she shrieked, and filled all the house with her weeping; when a sign
arises sudden and marvellous to tell. For, between the hands and before
the faces of his sorrowing parents, lo! above Iülus' head there seemed
to stream a light luminous cone, and a flame whose touch hurt not to
flicker in his soft hair and play round his brows. We in a flutter of
affright shook out the blazing hair and quenched the holy fires with
spring water. But lord Anchises joyfully upraised his eyes; and
stretching his hands to heaven: "Jupiter omnipotent," he cries, "if thou
dost relent at any prayers, look on us this once alone; and if our
goodness deserve it, give thine aid hereafter, O lord, and confirm this
thine omen."



'Scarcely had the aged man spoken thus, when with sudden crash it
thundered on the left, and a star gliding through the dusk shot from
heaven drawing a bright trail of light. We watch it slide over the
palace roof, leaving [696-730] the mark of its pathway, and bury its
brilliance in the wood of Ida; the long drawn track shines, and the
region all about fumes with sulphur. Then conquered indeed my father
rises to address the gods and worship the holy star. "Now, now delay is
done with: I follow, and where you lead, I come. Gods of my fathers,
save my house, save my grandchild. Yours is this omen, and in your deity
Troy stands. I yield, O my son, and refuse not to go in thy company."



'He ended; and now more loudly the fire roars along the city, and the
burning tides roll nearer. "Up then, beloved father, and lean on my
neck; these shoulders of mine will sustain thee, nor will so dear a
burden weigh me down. Howsoever fortune fall, one and undivided shall be
our peril, one the escape of us twain. Little Iülus shall go along with
me, and my wife follow our steps afar. You of my household, give heed to
what I say. As you leave the city there is a mound and ancient temple of
Ceres lonely on it, and hard by an aged cypress, guarded many years in
ancestral awe: to this resting-place let us gather from diverse
quarters. Thou, O father, take the sacred things and the household gods
of our ancestors in thine hand. For me, just parted from the desperate
battle, with slaughter fresh upon me, to handle them were guilt, until I
wash away in a living stream the soilure. . . ." So spoke I, and spread
over my neck and broad shoulders a tawny lion-skin for covering, and
stoop to my burden. Little Iülus, with his hand fast in mine, keeps
uneven pace after his father. Behind my wife follows. We pass on in the
shadows. And I, lately moved by no weapons launched against me, nor by
the thronging bands of my Grecian foes, am now terrified at every
breath, startled by every noise, thrilling with fear alike for my
companion and my burden.



'And now I was nearing the gates, and thought I had [731-764] outsped
all the way; when suddenly the crowded trampling of feet came to our
ears, and my father, looking forth into the darkness, cries: "My son, my
son, fly; they draw near. I espy the gleaming shields and the flicker of
brass." At this, in my flurry and confusion, some hostile god bereft me
of my senses. For while I plunge down byways, and swerve from where the
familiar streets ran, Creüsa, alas! whether, torn by fate from her
unhappy husband, she stood still, or did she mistake the way, or sink
down outwearied? I know not; and never again was she given back to our
eyes; nor did I turn to look for my lost one, or cast back a thought,
ere we were come to ancient Ceres' mound and hallowed seat; here at
last, when all gathered, one was missing, vanished from her child's and
her husband's company. What man or god did I spare in frantic
reproaches? or what crueller sight met me in our city's overthrow? I
charge my comrades with Ascanius and lord Anchises, and the gods of
Teucria, hiding them in the winding vale. Myself I regain the city,
girding on my shining armour; fixed to renew every danger, to retrace my
way throughout Troy, and fling myself again on its perils. First of all
I regain the walls and the dim gateway whence my steps had issued; I
scan and follow back my footprints with searching gaze in the night.
Everywhere my spirit shudders, dismayed at the very silence. Thence I
pass on home, if haply her feet (if haply!) had led her thither. The
Grecians had poured in, and filled the palace. The devouring fire goes
rolling before the wind high as the roof; the flames tower over it, and
the heat surges up into the air. I move on, and revisit the citadel and
Priam's dwelling; where now in the spacious porticoes of Juno's
sanctuary, Phoenix and accursed Ulysses, chosen sentries, were guarding
the spoil. Hither from all quarters is flung in masses the treasure of
Troy torn from burning shrines, [765-798] tables of the gods, bowls of
solid gold, and raiment of the captives. Boys and cowering mothers in
long file stand round. . . . Yes, and I dared to cry abroad through the
darkness; I filled the streets with calling, and again and yet again
with vain reiterance cried piteously on Creüsa. As I stormed and sought
her endlessly among the houses of the town, there rose before mine eyes
a melancholy phantom, the ghost of very Creüsa, in likeness larger than
her wont. I was motionless; my hair stood up, and the accents faltered
on my tongue. Then she thus addressed me, and with this speech allayed
my distresses: "What help is there in this mad passion of grief, sweet
my husband? not without divine influence does this come to pass: nor may
it be, nor does the high lord of Olympus allow, that thou shouldest
carry Creüsa hence in thy company. Long shall be thine exile, and weary
spaces of sea must thou furrow through; and thou shalt come to the land
Hesperia, where Lydian Tiber flows with soft current through rich and
populous fields. There prosperity awaits thee, and a kingdom, and a
king's daughter for thy wife. Dispel these tears for thy beloved Creüsa.
Never will I look on the proud homes of the Myrmidons or Dolopians, or
go to be the slave of Greek matrons, I a daughter of Dardania, a
daughter-in-law of Venus the goddess. . . . But the mighty mother of the
gods keeps me in these her borders. And now farewell, and still love thy
child and mine." This speech uttered, while I wept and would have said
many a thing, she left me and retreated into thin air. Thrice there was
I fain to lay mine arms round her neck; thrice the vision I vainly
clasped fled out of my hands, even as the light breezes, or most like to
fluttering sleep. So at last, when night is spent, I revisit my
comrades.



'And here I find a marvellous great company, newly flocked in, mothers
and men, a people gathered for exile, [799-804] a pitiable crowd. From
all quarters they are assembled, ready in heart and fortune, to
whatsoever land I will conduct them overseas. And now the morning star
rose over the high ridges of Ida, and led on the day; and the Grecians
held the gateways in leaguer, nor was any hope of help given. I
withdrew, and raising my father up, I sought the mountain.'

=== AENEID BOOK 3 ===

THE STORY OF THE SEVEN YEARS' WANDERING 


'After heaven's lords pleased to overthrow the state of Asia and Priam's
guiltless people, and proud Ilium fell, and Neptunian Troy smokes all
along the ground, we are driven by divine omens to seek distant places
of exile in waste lands. Right under Antandros and the mountains of
Phrygian Ida we build a fleet, uncertain whither the fates carry us or
where a resting-place is given, and gather the people together. Scarcely
had the first summer set in, when lord Anchises bids us spread our sails
to fortune, and weeping I leave the shores and havens of my country, and
the plains where once was Troy. I sail to sea an exile, with my comrades
and son and the gods of household and state.



'A land of vast plains lies apart, the home of Mavors, in Thracian
tillage, and sometime under warrior Lycurgus' reign; friendly of old to
Troy, and their gods in alliance while our fortune lasted. Hither I
pass, and on the winding shore I lay under thwarting fates the first
foundations of a city, and from my own name fashion its name, Aeneadae.



'I was paying sacrifice to my mother, daughter of Dione, and to all the
gods, so to favour the work begun, and slew a shining bull on the shore
to the high lord of [22-54] the heavenly people. Haply there lay a mound
hard at hand, crowned with cornel thickets and bristling dense with
shafts of myrtle. I drew near; and essaying to tear up the green wood
from the soil, that I might cover the altar with leafy boughs, I see a
portent ominous and wonderful to tell. For from the first tree whose
roots are rent away and broken from the ground, drops of black blood
trickle, and gore stains the earth. An icy shudder shakes my limbs, and
my blood curdles chill with terror. Yet from another I go on again to
tear away a tough shoot, fully to fathom its secret; yet from another
black blood follows out of the bark. With many searchings of heart I
prayed the woodland nymphs, and lord Gradivus, who rules in the Getic
fields, to make the sight propitious as was meet and lighten the omen.
But when I assail a third spearshaft with a stronger effort, pulling
with knees pressed against the sand; shall I speak or be silent? from
beneath the mound is heard a pitiable moan, and a voice is uttered to my
ears: "Woe's me, why rendest thou me, Aeneas? spare me at last in the
tomb, spare pollution to thine innocent hands. Troy bore me; not alien
to thee am I, nor this blood that oozes from the stem. Ah, fly the cruel
land, fly the greedy shore! For I am Polydorus; here the iron harvest of
weapons hath covered my pierced body, and shot up in sharp javelins."
Then indeed, borne down with dubious terror, I was motionless, my hair
stood up, and the accents faltered on my tongue.



'This Polydorus once with great weight of gold had hapless Priam sent in
secret to the nurture of the Thracian king, when now he was losing trust
in the arms of Dardania, and saw his city leaguered round about. The
king, when the Teucrian power was broken and fortune withdrew, following
Agamemnon's estate and triumphant arms, [55-87] severs every bond of
duty; murders Polydorus, and lays strong hands on the gold. O accursed
hunger of gold, to what dost thou not compel human hearts! When the
terror left my senses, I lay the divine tokens before the chosen princes
of the people, with my father at their head, and demand their judgment.
All are of one mind, to leave the guilty land, and abandoning a polluted
home, to let the gales waft our fleets. So we bury Polydorus anew, and
the earth is heaped high over his mound; altars are reared to his ghost,
sad with dusky chaplets and black cypress; and around are the Ilian
women with hair unbound in their fashion. We offer bubbling bowls of
warm milk and cups of consecrated blood, and lay the spirit to rest in
her tomb, and with loud voice utter the last call.



'Thereupon, so soon as ocean may be trusted, and the winds leave the
seas in quiet, and the soft whispering south wind calls seaward, my
comrades launch their ships and crowd the shores. We put out from
harbour, and lands and towns sink away. There lies in mid sea a holy
land, most dear to the mother of the Nereids and Neptune of Aegae, which
strayed about coast and strand till the Archer god in his affection
chained it fast from high Myconos and Gyaros, and made it lie immoveable
and slight the winds. Hither I steer; and it welcomes my weary crew to
the quiet shelter of a safe haven. We disembark and worship Apollo's
town. Anius the king, king at once of the people and priest of Phoebus,
his brows garlanded with fillets and consecrated laurel, comes to meet
us; he knows Anchises, his friend of old; we clasp hands in welcome, and
enter his palace. I worshipped the god's temple, an ancient pile of
stone. "Lord of Thymbra, give us an enduring dwelling-place; grant a
house and family to thy weary servants, and a city to abide: keep Troy's
second fortress, the remnant left of the Grecians and merciless
Achilles. Whom follow [88-121] we? or whither dost thou bid us go, where
fix our seat? Grant an omen, O lord, and inspire our minds."



'Scarcely had I spoken thus; suddenly all seemed to shake, all the
courts and laurels of the god, the whole hill to be stirred round about,
and the cauldron to moan in the opening sanctuary. We sink low on the
ground, and a voice is borne to our ears: "Stubborn race of Dardanus,
the same land that bore you by parentage of old shall receive you again
on her bountiful breast. Seek out your ancient mother; hence shall the
house of Aeneas sway all regions, his children's children and they who
shall be born of them." Thus Phoebus; and mingled outcries of great
gladness uprose; all ask, what is that city? whither calls Phoebus our
wandering, and bids us return? Then my father, unrolling the records of
men of old, "Hear, O princes," says he, "and learn your hopes. In mid
ocean lies Crete, the island of high Jove, wherein is mount Ida, the
cradle of our race. An hundred great towns are inhabited in that opulent
realm; from it our forefather Teucer of old, if I recall the tale
aright, sailed to the Rhoetean coasts and chose a place for his kingdom.
Not yet was Ilium nor the towers of Pergama reared; they dwelt in the
valley bottoms. Hence came our Lady, haunter of Cybele, the Corybantic
cymbals and the grove of Ida; hence the rites of inviolate secrecy, and
the lions yoked under the chariot of their mistress. Up then, and let us
follow where divine commandments lead; let us appease the winds, and
seek the realm of Gnosus. Nor is it a far journey away. Only be Jupiter
favourable, the third day shall bring our fleet to anchor on the Cretan
coast." So spoke he, and slew fit sacrifice on the altars, a bull to
Neptune, a bull to thee, fair Apollo, a black sheep to Tempest, a white
to the prosperous West winds.



'Rumour flies that Idomeneus the captain is driven [122-154] forth of
his father's realm, and the shores of Crete are abandoned, that the
houses are void of foes and the dwellings lie empty to our hand. We
leave the harbour of Ortygia, and fly along the main, by the revel-trod
ridges of Naxos, by green Donusa, Olearos and snow-white Paros, and the
sea-strewn Cyclades, threading the racing channels among the crowded
lands. The seamen's clamour rises in emulous dissonance; each cheers his
comrade: Seek we Crete and our forefathers. A wind rising astern
follows us forth on our way, and we glide at last to the ancient
Curetean coast. So I set eagerly to work on the walls of my chosen town,
and call it Pergamea, and exhort my people, joyful at the name, to
cherish their homes and rear the castle buildings. And even now the
ships were drawn up on the dry beach; the people were busy in marriages
and among their new fields; I was giving statutes and homesteads; when
suddenly from a tainted space of sky came, noisome on men's bodies and
pitiable on trees and crops, pestilence and a year of death. They left
their sweet lives or dragged themselves on in misery; Sirius scorched
the fields into barrenness; the herbage grew dry, and the sickly harvest
denied sustenance. My father counsels to remeasure the sea and go again
to Phoebus in his Ortygian oracle, to pray for grace and ask what issue
he ordains to our exhausted state; whence he bids us search for aid to
our woes, whither bend our course.



'Night fell, and sleep held all things living on the earth. The sacred
images of the gods and the household deities of Phrygia, that I had
borne with me from Troy out of the midst of the burning city, seemed to
stand before mine eyes as I lay sleepless, clear in the broad light
where the full moon poured through the latticed windows; then thus
addressed me, and with this speech allayed my distresses: "What Apollo
hath to tell thee when thou dost [155-188] reach Ortygia, he utters
here, and sends us unsought to thy threshold. We who followed thee and
thine arms when Dardania went down in fire; we who under thee have
traversed on shipboard the swelling sea; we in like wise will exalt to
heaven thy children to be, and give empire to their city. Do thou
prepare a mighty town for a mighty people, nor draw back from the long
wearisome chase. Thou must change thy dwelling. Not to these shores did
the god at Delos counsel thee, or Apollo bid thee find rest in Crete.
There is a region Greeks name Hesperia, an ancient land, mighty in arms
and foison of the clod; Oenotrian men dwell therein; now rumour is that
a younger race have called it Italy after their captain's name. This is
our true dwelling place; hence is Dardanus sprung, and lord Iasius, the
first source of our race. Up, arise, and tell with good cheer to thine
aged parent this plain tale, to seek Corythus and the lands of Ausonia.
Jupiter denies thee the Dictaean fields."



'Astonished at this vision and divine utterance (nor was that slumber;
but openly I seemed to know their countenances, their veiled hair and
gracious faces, and therewith a cold sweat broke out all over me) I
spring from my bed and raise my voice and upturned hands skyward and pay
pure offering on the hearth. The sacrifice done, I joyfully tell
Anchises, and relate all in order. He recognises the double descent and
twofold parentage, and the later wanderings that had deceived him among
ancient lands. Then he speaks: "O son, hard wrought by the destinies of
Ilium, Cassandra only foretold me this fortune. Now I recall how she
prophesied this was fated to our race, and often cried of Hesperia,
often of an Italian realm. But who was to believe that Teucrians should
come to Hesperian shores? or whom might Cassandra then move by prophecy?
Yield we to Phoebus, and follow the better [189-222] way he counsels."
So says he, and we all rejoicingly obey his speech. This dwelling
likewise we abandon; and leaving some few behind, spread our sails and
run over the waste sea in our hollow wood.



'After our ships held the high seas, nor any land yet appears, the sky
all round us and all round us the deep, a dusky shower drew up overhead
carrying night and tempest, and the wave shuddered and gloomed.
Straightway the winds upturn the main, and great seas rise; we are
tossed asunder over the dreary gulf. Stormclouds enwrap the day, and
rainy gloom blots out the sky; out of the clouds bursts fire fast upon
fire. Driven from our course, we go wandering on the blind waves.
Palinurus himself professes he cannot tell day from night on the sky,
nor remember the way amid the waters. Three dubious days of blind
darkness we wander on the deep, as many nights without a star. Not till
the fourth day was land at last seen to rise, discovering distant hills
and sending up wreaths of smoke. The sails drop; we swing back to the
oars; without delay the sailors strongly toss up the foam, and sweep
through the green water. The shores of the Strophades first receive me
thus won from the waves, Strophades the Greek name they bear, islands
lying in the great Ionian sea, which boding Celaeno and the other
Harpies inhabit since Phineus' house was shut on them, and they fled in
terror from the board of old. Than these no deadlier portent nor any
fiercer plague of divine wrath hath issued from the Stygian waters;
winged things with maidens' countenance, bellies dropping filth, and
clawed hands and faces ever wan with hunger. . . .



'When borne hitherward we enter the haven, lo! we see goodly herds of
oxen scattered on the plains, and goats flocking untended over the
grass. We attack them with the sword, and call the gods and Jove himself
to share our [223-258] spoil. Then we build seats on the winding shore
and banquet on the dainty food. But suddenly the Harpies are upon us,
swooping awfully from the mountains, and shaking their wings with loud
clangour, plunder the feast, and defile everything with unclean touch,
spreading a foul smell, and uttering dreadful cries. Again, in a deep
recess under a caverned rock, shut in with waving shadows of woodland,
we array the board and renew the altar fires; again, from their blind
ambush in diverse quarters of the sky, the noisy crowd flutter with
clawed feet around their prey, defiling the feast with their lips. Then
I bid my comrades take up arms, and proclaim war on the accursed race.
Even as I bade they do, range their swords in cover among the grass, and
hide their shields out of sight. So when they swooped clamorously down
along the winding shore, Misenus from his watch-tower on high signals on
the hollow brass; my comrades rush in and essay the strange battle, to
set the stain of steel on the winged horrors of the sea. But they take
no violence on their plumage, nor wounds on their bodies; and soaring
into the firmament with rapid flight, leave their foul traces on the
spoil they had half consumed. Celaeno alone, prophetess of ill, alights
on a towering cliff, and thus breaks forth in deep accents:



'"War is it for your slaughtered oxen and steers cut down, O children of
Laomedon, war is it you would declare, and drive the guiltless Harpies
from their ancestral kingdom? Take then to heart and fix fast these
words of mine; which the Lord omnipotent foretold to Phoebus, Phoebus
Apollo to me, I eldest born of the Furies reveal to you. Italy is your
goal; wooing the winds you shall go to Italy, and enter her harbours
unhindered. Yet shall you not wall round your ordained city, ere this
murderous outrage on us compel you, in portentous hunger, to eat your
tables with gnawing teeth."



'She spoke, and winged her way back to the shelter of [259-293] the
wood. But my comrades' blood froze chill with sudden affright; their
spirits fell; and no longer with arms, nay with vows and prayers they
bid me entreat favour, whether these be goddesses, or winged things
ill-ominous and foul. And lord Anchises from the beach calls with
outspread hands on the mighty gods, ordering fit sacrifices: "Gods,
avert their menaces! Gods, turn this woe away, and graciously save the
righteous!" Then he bids pluck the cable from the shore and shake loose
the sheets. Southern winds stretch the sails; we scud over the
foam-flecked waters, whither wind and pilot called our course. Now
wooded Zacynthos appears amid the waves, and Dulichium and Same and
Neritos' sheer rocks. We fly past the cliffs of Ithaca, Laërtes' realm,
and curse the land, fostress of cruel Ulysses. Soon too Mount Leucata's
cloudy peaks are sighted, and Apollo dreaded of sailors. Hither we steer
wearily, and stand in to the little town. The anchor is cast from the
prow; the sterns are grounded on the beach.



'So at last having attained to land beyond our hopes, we purify
ourselves in Jove's worship, and kindle altars of offering, and make the
Actian shore gay with the games of Ilium. My comrades strip, and,
slippery with oil, exercise their ancestral contests; glad to have got
past so many Argive towns, and held on their flight through the
encircling foe. Meanwhile the sun rounds the great circle of the year,
and icy winter ruffles the waters with Northern gales. I fix against the
doorway a hollow shield of brass, that tall Abas had borne, and mark the
story with a verse: These arms Aeneas from the conquering Greeks. Then
I bid leave the harbour and sit down at the thwarts; emulously my
comrades strike the water, and sweep through the seas. Soon we see the
cloud-capped Phaeacian towers sink away, skirt the shores of Epirus, and
enter the Chaonian haven and approach high Buthrotum town.




[294-328] 'Here the rumour of a story beyond belief comes on our ears;
Helenus son of Priam is reigning over Greek towns, master of the bride
and sceptre of Pyrrhus the Aeacid; and Andromache hath again fallen to a
husband of her people. I stood amazed; and my heart kindled with
marvellous desire to accost him and learn of so strange a fortune. I
advance from the harbour, leaving the fleet ashore; just when haply
Andromache, in a grove before the town, by the waters of a feigned
Simoïs, was pouring libation to the dust, and calling Hector's ghost to
a tomb with his name, on an empty turfed green with two altars that she
had consecrated, a wellspring of tears. When she caught sight of me
coming, and saw distractedly the encircling arms of Troy,
terror-stricken at the vision marvellously shewn, her gaze fixed, and
the heat left her frame. She swoons away, and hardly at last speaks
after long interval: "Comest thou then a real face, a real messenger to
me, goddess-born? livest thou? or if sweet light is fled, ah, where is
Hector?" She spoke, and bursting into tears filled all the place with
her crying. Just a few words I force up, and deeply moved gasp out in
broken accents: "I live indeed, I live on through all extremities; doubt
not, for real are the forms thou seest . . . Alas! after such an husband,
what fate receives thy fall? or what worthier fortune revisits thee?
Dost thou, Hector's Andromache, keep bonds of marriage with Pyrrhus?"
She cast down her countenance, and spoke with lowered voice:



'"O single in happy eminence that maiden daughter of Priam, sentenced to
die under high Troy town at an enemy's grave, who never bore the shame
of the lot, nor came a captive to her victorious master's bed! We,
sailing over alien seas from our burning land, have endured the haughty
youthful pride of Achilles' seed, and borne children in slavery: he
thereafter, wooing Leda's Hermione and a Lacedaemonian
[329-363] marriage, passed me over to Helenus' keeping, a bondwoman to a
bondman. But him Orestes, aflame with passionate desire for his stolen
bride, and driven by the furies of crime, catches unguarded and murders
at his ancestral altars. At Neoptolemus' death a share of his realm fell
to Helenus' hands, who named the plains Chaonian, and called all the
land Chaonia after Chaon of Troy, and built withal a Pergama and this
Ilian citadel on the hills. But to thee how did winds, how fates give
passage? or whose divinity landed thee all unwitting on our coasts? what
of the boy Ascanius? lives he yet, and draws breath, thy darling, whom
Troy's . . . Yet hath the child affection for his lost mother? is he
roused to the valour of old and the spirit of manhood by his father
Aeneas, by his uncle Hector?"



'Such words she poured forth weeping, and prolonged the vain wail; when
the hero Helenus son of Priam approaches from the town with a great
company, knows us for his kin, and leads us joyfully to his gates,
shedding a many tears at every word. I advance and recognise a little
Troy, and a copy of the great Pergama, and a dry brook with the name of
Xanthus, and clasp a Scaean gateway. Therewithal my Teucrians make
holiday in the friendly town. The king entertained them in his spacious
colonnades; in the central hall they poured goblets of wine in libation,
and held the cups while the feast was served on gold.



'And now a day and another day hath sped; the breezes woo our sails, and
the canvas blows out to the swelling south. With these words I accost
the prophet, and thus make request:



'"Son of Troy, interpreter of the gods, whose sense is open to Phoebus'
influences, his tripods and laurels, to stars and tongues of birds and
auguries of prosperous flight, tell me now,—for the voice of revelation
was all favourable to my course, and all divine influence counselled me
to [364-396] seek Italy and explore remote lands; only Celaeno the Harpy
prophesies of strange portents, a horror to tell, and cries out of wrath
and bale and foul hunger,—what perils are the first to shun? or in what
guidance may I overcome these sore labours?"



'Hereat Helenus, first suing for divine favour with fit sacrifice of
steers, and unbinding from his head the chaplets of consecration, leads
me in his hand to thy courts, O Phoebus, thrilled with the fulness of
the deity, and then utters these prophetic words from his augural lips:



'"Goddess-born: since there is clear assurance that under high omens
thou dost voyage through the deep; so the king of the gods allots
destiny and unfolds change; this is the circle of ordinance; a few
things out of many I will unfold to thee in speech, that so thou mayest
more safely traverse the seas of thy sojourn, and find rest in the
Ausonian haven; for Helenus is forbidden by the destinies to know, and
by Juno daughter of Saturn to utter more: first of all, the Italy thou
deemest now nigh, and close at hand, unwitting! the harbours thou
wouldst enter, far are they sundered by a long and trackless track
through length of lands. First must the Trinacrian wave clog thine oar,
and thy ships traverse the salt Ausonian plain, by the infernal pools
and Aeaean Circe's isle, ere thou mayest build thy city in safety on a
peaceful land. I will tell thee the token, and do thou keep it close in
thine heart. When in thy perplexity, beside the wave of a sequestered
river, a great sow shall be discovered lying under the oaks on the
brink, with her newborn litter of thirty, couched white on the ground,
her white brood about her teats; that shall be the place of the city,
that the appointed rest from thy toils. Neither shrink thou at the gnawn
tables that await thee; the fates will find a way, and Apollo aid thy
call. These lands moreover, on this nearest border of the Italian shore
[397-432] that our own sea's tide washes, flee thou: evil Greeks dwell
in all their towns. Here the Locrians of Narycos have set their city,
and here Lyctian Idomeneus beset the Sallentine plains with soldiery;
here is the town of the Meliboean captain, Philoctetes' little Petelia
fenced by her wall. Nay, when thy fleets have crossed overseas and lie
at anchor, when now thou rearest altars and payest vows on the beach,
veil thine hair with a purple garment for covering, that no hostile face
at thy divine worship may meet thee amid the holy fires and make void
the omens. This fashion of sacrifice keep thou, thyself and thy
comrades, and let thy children abide in this pure observance. But when
at thy departure the wind hath borne thee to the Sicilian coast, and the
barred straits of Pelorus open out, steer for the left-hand country and
the long circuit of the seas on the left hand; shun the shore and water
on thy right. These lands, they say, of old broke asunder, torn and
upheaved by vast force, when either country was one and undivided; the
ocean burst in between, cutting off with its waves the Hesperian from
the Sicilian coast, and with narrow tide washes tilth and town along the
severance of shore. On the right Scylla keeps guard, on the left
unassuaged Charybdis, who thrice swallows the vast flood sheer down her
swirling gulf, and ever again hurls it upward, lashing the sky with
water. But Scylla lies prisoned in her cavern's blind recesses,
thrusting forth her mouth and drawing ships upon the rocks. In front her
face is human, and her breast fair as a maiden's to the waist down;
behind she is a sea-dragon of monstrous frame, with dolphins' tails
joined on her wolf-girt belly. Better to track the goal of Trinacrian
Pachynus, lingering and wheeling round through long spaces, than once
catch sight of misshapen Scylla deep in her dreary cavern, and of the
rocks that ring to her sea-coloured hounds. Moreover, if
[433-466] Helenus hath aught of foresight or his prophecy of assurance,
if Apollo fills his spirit with the truth, this one thing, goddess-born,
one thing for all will I foretell thee, and again and again repeat my
counsel: to great Juno's deity be thy first prayer and worship; to Juno
utter thy willing vows, and overcome thy mighty mistress with gifts and
supplications; so at last thou shalt leave Trinacria behind, and be sped
in triumph to the Italian borders. When borne hither thou drawest nigh
the Cymaean city, the haunted lakes and rustling woods of Avernus, thou
shalt behold the raving prophetess who deep in the rock chants of fate,
and marks down her words on leaves. What verses she writes down on them,
the maiden sorts into order and shuts behind her in the cave; they stay
in their places unstirred and quit not their rank. But when at the turn
of the hinge the light wind from the doorway stirs them, and disarranges
the delicate foliage, never after does she trouble to capture them as
they flutter about the hollow rock, nor restore their places or join the
verses; men depart without counsel, and hate the Sibyl's dwelling. Here
let no waste in delay be of such account to thee (though thy company
chide, and the passage call thy sails strongly to the deep, and thou
mayest fill out their folds to thy desire) that thou do not approach the
prophetess, and plead with prayers that she herself utter her oracles
and deign to loose the accents from her lips. The nations of Italy and
the wars to come, and the fashion whereby every toil may be avoided or
endured, she shall unfold to thee, and grant her worshipper prosperous
passage. Thus far is our voice allowed to counsel thee: go thy way, and
exalt Troy to heaven by thy deeds."



'This the seer uttered with friendly lips; then orders gifts to be
carried to my ships, of heavy gold and sawn ivory, and loads the hulls
with massy silver and cauldrons [467-502] of Dodona, a mail coat
triple-woven with hooks of gold, and a helmet splendid with spike and
tressed plumes, the armour of Neoptolemus. My father too hath his gifts.
Horses besides he brings, and grooms . . . fills up the tale of our
oarsmen, and equips my crews with arms.



'Meanwhile Anchises bade the fleet set their sails, that the fair wind
might meet no delay. Him Phoebus' interpreter accosts with high
courtesy: "Anchises, honoured with the splendour of Venus' espousal, the
gods' charge, twice rescued from the fallen towers of Troy, lo! the land
of Ausonia is before thee: sail thou and seize it. And yet needs must
thou float past it on the sea; far away lies the quarter of Ausonia that
is revealed of Apollo. Go," he continues, "happy in thy son's affection:
why do I run on further, and delay the rising winds in talk?" Andromache
too, sad at this last parting, brings figured raiment with woof of gold,
and a Phrygian scarf for Ascanius, and wearies not in courtesy, loading
him with gifts from the loom. "Take these too," so says she, "my child,
to be memorials to thee of my hands, and testify long hence the love of
Andromache wife of Hector. Take these last gifts of thy kinsfolk, O sole
surviving likeness to me of my own Astyanax! Such was he, in eyes and
hands and features; and now his equal age were growing into manhood like
thine."



'To them as I departed I spoke with starting tears: "Live happily, as
they do whose fortunes are perfected! We are summoned ever from fate to
fate. For you there is rest in store, and no ocean floor to furrow, no
ever-retreating Ausonian fields to pursue. You see a pictured Xanthus,
and a Troy your own hands have built; with better omens, I pray, and to
be less open to the Greeks. If ever I enter Tiber and Tiber's bordering
fields, and see a city granted to my nation, then of these kindred towns
[503-537] and allied peoples in Epirus and Hesperia, which have the same
Dardanus for founder, and whose story is one, of both will our hearts
make a single Troy. Let that charge await our posterity."



'We put out to sea, keeping the Ceraunian mountains close at hand,
whence is the shortest passage and seaway to Italy. The sun sets
meanwhile, and the dusky hills grow dim. We choose a place, and fling
ourselves on the lap of earth at the water's edge, and, allotting the
oars, spread ourselves on the dry beach for refreshment: the dew of
slumber falls on our weary limbs. Not yet had Night driven of the Hours
climbed her mid arch; Palinurus rises lightly from his couch, explores
all the winds, and listens to catch a breeze; he marks the
constellations gliding together through the silent sky, Arcturus, the
rainy Hyades and the twin Oxen, and scans Orion in his armour of gold.
When he sees the clear sky quite unbroken, he gives from the stern his
shrill signal; we disencamp and explore the way, and spread the wings of
our sails. And now reddening Dawn had chased away the stars, when we
descry afar dim hills and the low line of Italy. Achates first raises
the cry of Italy ; and with joyous shouts my comrades salute Italy.
Then lord Anchises enwreathed a great bowl and filled it up with wine;
and called on the gods, standing high astern . . . "Gods sovereign over
sea and land and weather! bring wind to ease our way, and breathe
favourably." The breezes freshen at his prayer, and now the harbour
opens out nearer at hand, and a temple appears on the Fort of Minerva.
My comrades furl the sails and swing the prows to shore. The harbour is
scooped into an arch by the Eastern flood; reefs run out and foam with
the salt spray; itself it lies concealed; turreted walls of rock let
down their arms on either hand, and the temple retreats from the beach.
Here, an inaugural sight, four horses of snowy [538-570] whiteness are
grazing abroad on the grassy plain. And lord Anchises: "War dost thou
carry, land of our sojourn; horses are armed in war, and menace of war
is in this herd. But yet these same beasts are wont in time to enter
harness, and carry yoke and bit in concord; there is hope of peace too,"
says he. Then we pray to the holy deity, Pallas of the clangorous arms,
the first to welcome our cheers. And before the altars we veil our heads
in Phrygian garments, and duly, after the counsel Helenus had urged
deepest on us, pay the bidden burnt-sacrifice to Juno of Argos.



'Without delay, once our vows are fully paid, we round to the arms of
our sailyards and leave the dwellings and menacing fields of the Grecian
people. Next is descried the bay of Tarentum, town, if rumour is true,
of Hercules. Over against it the goddess of Lacinium rears her head,
with the towers of Caulon, and Scylaceum wrecker of ships. Then
Trinacrian Aetna is descried in the distance rising from the waves, and
we hear from afar a great roaring of the sea on beaten rocks, and broken
noises by the shore: the channels boil up, and the surge churns with
sand. And lord Anchises: "Of a surety this is that Charybdis; of these
cliffs, these awful rocks did Helenus prophesy. Out, O comrades, and
rise together to the oars." Even as bidden they do; and first Palinurus
swung the gurgling prow leftward through the water; to the left all our
squadron bent with oar and wind. We are lifted skyward on the crescent
wave, and again sunk deep into the nether world as the water is sucked
away. Thrice amid their rocky caverns the cliffs uttered a cry; thrice
we see the foam flung out, and the stars through a dripping veil.
Meanwhile the wind falls with sundown; and weary and ignorant of the way
we glide on to the Cyclopes' coast.



'There lies a harbour large and unstirred by the winds'
[571-604] entrance; but nigh it Aetna thunders awfully in wrack, and
ever and again hurls a black cloud into the sky, smoking with boiling
pitch and embers white hot, and heaves balls of flame flickering up to
the stars: ever and again vomits out on high crags from the torn
entrails of the mountain, tosses up masses of molten rock with a groan,
and boils forth from the bottom. Rumour is that this mass weighs down
the body of Enceladus, half-consumed by the thunderbolt, and mighty
Aetna laid over him suspires the flame that bursts from her furnaces;
and so often as he changes his weary side, all Trinacria shudders and
moans, veiling the sky in smoke. That night we spend in cover of the
forest among portentous horrors, and see not from what source the noise
comes. For neither did the stars show their fires, nor was the vault of
constellated sky clear; but vapours blotted heaven, and the moon was
held in a storm-cloud through dead of night.



'And now the morrow was rising in the early east, and the dewy darkness
rolled away from the sky by Dawn, when sudden out of the forest advances
a human shape strange and unknown, worn with uttermost hunger and
pitiably attired, and stretches entreating hands towards the shore. We
look back. Filthy and wretched, with shaggy beard and a coat pinned
together with thorns, he was yet a Greek, and had been sent of old to
Troy in his father's arms. And he, when he saw afar the Dardanian habits
and armour of Troy, hung back a little in terror at the sight, and
stayed his steps; then ran headlong to the shore with weeping and
prayers: "By the heavens I beseech you, by the heavenly powers and this
luminous sky that gives us breath, take me up, O Trojans, carry me away
to any land soever, and it will be enough. I know I am one out of the
Grecian fleets, I confess I warred against the household gods of Ilium;
for that, if our wrong and guilt is so great, throw [605-639] me
piecemeal on the flood or plunge me in the waste sea. If I do perish,
gladly will I perish at human hands." He ended; and clung clasping our
knees and grovelling at them. We encourage him to tell who he is and of
what blood born, and reveal how Fortune pursues him since then. Lord
Anchises after little delay gives him his hand, and strengthens his
courage by visible pledge. At last, laying aside his terror, he speaks
thus:



'"I am from an Ithacan home, Achemenides by name, set out for Troy in
luckless Ulysses' company; poor was my father Adamastus, and would God
fortune had stayed thus! Here my comrades abandoned me in the Cyclops'
vast cave, mindless of me while they hurry away from the barbarous
gates. It is a house of gore and blood-stained feasts, dim and huge
within. Himself he is great of stature and knocks at the lofty sky
(gods, take away a curse like this from earth!) to none gracious in
aspect or courteous of speech. He feeds on the flesh and dark blood of
wretched men. I myself saw, when he caught the bodies of two of us with
his great hand, and lying back in the middle of the cave crushed them on
the rock, and the courts splashed and swam with gore; I saw when he
champed the flesh adrip with dark clots of blood, and the warm limbs
quivered under his teeth. Yet not unavenged. Ulysses brooked not this,
nor even in such straits did the Ithacan forget himself. For so soon as
he, gorged with his feast and buried in wine, lay with bent neck
sprawling huge over the cave, in his sleep vomiting gore and gobbets
mixed with wine and blood, we, praying to the great gods and with parts
allotted, pour at once all round him, and pierce with a sharp weapon the
huge eye that lay sunk single under his savage brow, in fashion of an
Argolic shield or the lamp of the moon; and at last we exultingly avenge
the ghosts of our comrades. But fly, O wretched men, fly [640-674] and
pluck the cable from the beach. . . . For even in the shape and stature of
Polyphemus, when he shuts his fleeced flocks and drains their udders in
the cave's covert, an hundred other horrible Cyclopes dwell all about
this shore and stray on the mountain heights. Thrice now does the horned
moon fill out her light, while I linger in life among desolate lairs and
haunts of wild beasts in the woodland, and from a rock survey the giant
Cyclopes and shudder at their cries and echoing feet. The boughs yield a
miserable sustenance, berries and stony sloes, and plants torn up by the
root feed me. Sweeping all the view, I at last espied this fleet
standing in to shore. On it, whatsoever it were, I cast myself; it is
enough to have escaped the accursed tribe. Do you rather, by any death
you will, destroy this life of mine."



'Scarcely had he spoken thus, when on the mountain top we see
shepherding his flocks a vast moving mass, Polyphemus himself seeking
the shores he knew, a horror ominous, shapeless, huge, bereft of sight.
A pine lopped by his hand guides and steadies his footsteps. His fleeced
sheep attend him, this his single delight and solace in ill. . . . After he
hath touched the deep flood and come to the sea, he washes in it the
blood that oozes from his eye-socket, grinding his teeth with groans;
and now he strides through the sea up to his middle, nor yet does the
wave wet his towering sides. We hurry far away in precipitate flight,
with the suppliant who had so well merited rescue; and silently cut the
cable, and bending forward sweep the sea with emulous oars. He heard,
and turned his steps towards the echoing sound. But when he may in no
wise lay hands on us, nor can fathom the Ionian waves in pursuit, he
raises a vast cry, at which the sea and all his waves shuddered, and the
deep land of Italy was startled, and Aetna's vaulted caverns moaned. But
the tribe of the [675-709] Cyclopes, roused from the high wooded hills,
run to the harbour and fill the shore. We descry the Aetnean brotherhood
standing impotent with scowling eye, their stately heads up to heaven, a
dreadful consistory; even as on a mountain summit stand oaks high in air
or coned cypresses, a high forest of Jove or covert of Diana. Sharp fear
urges us to shake out the sheets in reckless haste, and spread our sails
to the favouring wind. Yet Helenus' commands counsel that our course
keep not the way between Scylla and Charybdis, the very edge of death on
either hand. We are resolved to turn our canvas back. And lo! from the
narrow fastness of Pelorus the North wind comes down and reaches us. I
sail past Pantagias' mouth with its living stone, the Megarian bay, and
low-lying Thapsus. Such names did Achemenides, of luckless Ulysses'
company, point out as he retraced his wanderings along the returning
shores.



'Stretched in front of a bay of Sicily lies an islet over against
wavebeat Plemyrium; they of old called it Ortygia. Hither Alpheus the
river of Elis, so rumour runs, hath cloven a secret passage beneath the
sea, and now through thy well-head, Arethusa, mingles with the Sicilian
waves. We adore as bidden the great deities of the ground; and thence I
cross the fertile soil of Helorus in the marsh. Next we graze the high
reefs and jutting rocks of Pachynus; and far off appears Camarina,
forbidden for ever by oracles to move, and the Geloan plains, and vast
Gela named after its river. Then Acragas on the steep, once the breeder
of noble horses, displays its massive walls in the distance; and with
granted breeze I leave thee behind, palm-girt Selinus, and thread the
difficult shoals and blind reefs of Lilybaeum. Thereon Drepanum receives
me in its haven and joyless border. Here, so many tempestuous seas
outgone, alas! my father, the solace of every care and chance, Anchises
is [710-718] lost to me. Here thou, dear lord, abandonest me in
weariness, alas! rescued in vain from peril and doom. Not Helenus the
prophet, though he counselled of many a terror, not boding Celaeno
foretold me of this grief. This was the last agony, this the goal of the
long ways; thence it was I had departed when God landed me on your
coasts.'



Thus lord Aeneas with all attent retold alone the divine doom and the
history of his goings. At last he was hushed, and here in silence made
an end.

=== AENEID BOOK 4 ===

THE LOVE OF DIDO, AND HER END 


But the Queen, long ere now pierced with sore distress, feeds the wound
with her life-blood, and catches the fire unseen. Again and again his
own valiance and his line's renown flood back upon her spirit; look and
accent cling fast in her bosom, and the pain allows not rest or calm to
her limbs. The morrow's dawn bore the torch of Phoebus across the earth,
and had rolled away the dewy darkness from the sky, when, scarce
herself, she thus opens her confidence to her sister:



'Anna, my sister, such dreams of terror thrill me through! What guest
unknown is this who hath entered our dwelling? How high his mien! how
brave in heart as in arms! I believe it well, with no vain assurance,
his blood is divine. Fear proves the vulgar spirit. Alas, by what
destinies is he driven! what wars outgone he chronicled! Were my mind
not planted, fixed and immoveable, to ally myself to none in wedlock
since my love of old was false to me in the treachery of death; were I
not sick to the heart of bridal torch and chamber, to this temptation
alone I might haply yield. Anna, I will confess it; since Sychaeus mine
husband met his piteous doom, and our household was shattered by a
brother's murder, he only hath [22-55] touched mine heart and stirred
the balance of my soul. I know the prints of the ancient flame. But
rather, I pray, may earth first yawn deep for me, or the Lord omnipotent
hurl me with his thunderbolt into gloom, the pallid gloom and profound
night of Erebus, ere I soil thee, mine honour, or unloose thy laws. He
took my love away who made me one with him long ago; he shall keep it
with him, and guard it in the tomb.' She spoke, and welling tears filled
the bosom of her gown.



Anna replies: 'O dearer than the daylight to thy sister, wilt thou
waste, sad and alone, all thy length of youth, and know not the
sweetness of motherhood, nor love's bounty? Deemest thou the ashes care
for that, or the ghost within the tomb? Be it so: in days gone by no
wooers bent thy sorrow, not in Libya, not ere then in Tyre; Iarbas was
slighted, and other princes nurtured by the triumphal land of Africa;
wilt thou contend so with a love to thy liking? nor does it cross thy
mind whose are these fields about thy dwelling? On this side are the
Gaetulian towns, a race unconquerable in war; the reinless Numidian
riders and the grim Syrtis hem thee in; on this lies a thirsty tract of
desert, swept by the raiders of Barca. Why speak of the war gathering
from Tyre, and thy brother's menaces? . . . With gods' auspices to my
thinking, and with Juno's favour, hath the Ilian fleet held on hither
before the gale. What a city wilt thou discern here, O sister! what a
realm will rise on such a union! the arms of Troy ranged with ours, what
glory will exalt the Punic state! Do thou only, asking divine favour
with peace-offerings, be bounteous in welcome and draw out reasons for
delay, while the storm rages at sea and Orion is wet, and his ships are
shattered and the sky unvoyageable.' With these words she made the fire
of love flame up in her spirit, put hope in her wavering soul, and let
honour slip away.




[56-90] First they visit the shrines, and desire grace from altar to
altar; they sacrifice sheep fitly chosen to Ceres the Lawgiver, to
Phoebus and lord Lyaeus, to Juno before all, guardian of the marriage
bond. Dido herself, excellent in beauty, holds the cup in her hand, and
pours libation between the horns of a milk-white cow, or moves in state
to the rich altars before the gods' presences, day by day renewing her
gifts, and gazing athirst into the breasts of cattle laid open to take
counsel from the throbbing entrails. Ah, witless souls of soothsayers!
how may vows or shrines help her madness? all the while the subtle flame
consumes her inly, and deep in her breast the wound is silent and alive.
Stung to misery, Dido wanders in frenzy all down the city, even as an
arrow-stricken deer, whom, far and heedless amid the Cretan woodland, a
shepherd archer hath pierced and left the flying steel in her unaware;
she ranges in flight the Dictaean forest lawns; fast in her side clings
the deadly reed. Now she leads Aeneas with her through the town, and
displays her Sidonian treasure and ordered city; she essays to speak,
and breaks off half-way in utterance. Now, as day wanes, she seeks the
repeated banquet, and again madly pleads to hear the agonies of Ilium,
and again hangs on the teller's lips. Thereafter, when all are gone
their ways, and the dim moon in turn quenches her light, and the setting
stars counsel to sleep, alone in the empty house she mourns, and flings
herself on the couch he left: distant she hears and sees him in the
distance; or enthralled by the look he has of his father, she holds
Ascanius on her lap, if so she may steal the love she may not utter. No
more do the unfinished towers rise, no more do the people exercise in
arms, nor work for safety in war on harbour or bastion; the works hang
broken off, vast looming walls and engines towering into the sky.



So soon as she perceives her thus fast in the toils, and [91-124] madly
careless of her name, Jove's beloved wife, daughter of Saturn, accosts
Venus thus:



'Noble indeed is the fame and splendid the spoils you win, thou and that
boy of thine, and mighty the renown of deity, if two gods have
vanquished one woman by treachery. Nor am I so blind to thy terror of
our town, thine old suspicion of the high house of Carthage. But what
shall be the end? or why all this contest now? Nay, rather let us work
an enduring peace and a bridal compact. Thou hast what all thy soul
desired; Dido is on fire with love, and hath caught the madness through
and through. Then rule we this people jointly in equal lordship; allow
her to be a Phrygian husband's slave, and to lay her Tyrians for dowry
in thine hand.'



To her—for she knew the dissembled purpose of her words, to turn the
Teucrian kingdom away to the coasts of Libya—Venus thus began in
answer: 'Who so mad as to reject these terms, or choose rather to try
the fortune of war with thee? if only when done, as thou sayest, fortune
follow. But I move in uncertainty of Jove's ordinance, whether he will
that Tyrians and wanderers from Troy be one city, or approve the
mingling of peoples and the treaty of union. Thou art his wife, and thy
prayers may essay his soul. Go on; I will follow.'



Then Queen Juno thus rejoined: 'That task shall be mine. Now, by what
means the present need may be fulfilled, attend and I will explain in
brief. Aeneas and Dido (alas and woe for her!) are to go hunting
together in the woodland when to-morrow's rising sun goes forth and his
rays unveil the world. On them, while the beaters run up and down, and
the lawns are girt with toils, will I pour down a blackening rain-cloud
mingled with hail, and startle all the sky in thunder. Their company
will scatter for shelter in the dim darkness; Dido and the Trojan
captain [125-159] shall take refuge in the same cavern. I will be there,
and if thy goodwill is assured me, I will unite them in wedlock, and
make her wholly his; here shall Hymen be present.' The Cytherean gave
ready assent to her request, and laughed at the wily invention.



Meanwhile Dawn rises forth of ocean. A chosen company issue from the
gates while the morning star is high; they pour forth with meshed nets,
toils, broad-headed hunting spears, Massylian horsemen and sinewy
sleuth-hounds. At her doorway the chief of Carthage await their queen,
who yet lingers in her chamber, and her horse stands splendid in gold
and purple with clattering feet and jaws champing on the foamy bit. At
last she comes forth amid a great thronging train, girt in a Sidonian
mantle, broidered with needlework; her quiver is of gold, her tresses
knotted into gold, a golden buckle clasps up her crimson gown.
Therewithal the Phrygian train advances with joyous Iülus. Himself first
and foremost of all, Aeneas joins her company and unites his party to
hers: even as Apollo, when he leaves wintry Lycia and the streams of
Xanthus to visit his mother's Delos, and renews the dance, while Cretans
and Dryopes and painted Agathyrsians mingle clamorous about his altars:
himself he treads the Cynthian ridges, and plaits his flowing hair with
soft heavy sprays and entwines it with gold; the arrows rattle on his
shoulder: as lightly as he went Aeneas; such glow and beauty is on his
princely face. When they are come to the mountain heights and pathless
coverts, lo, wild goats driven from the cliff-tops run down the ridge;
in another quarter stags speed over the open plain and gather their
flying column in a cloud of dust as they leave the hills. But the boy
Ascanius is in the valleys, exultant on his fiery horse, and gallops
past one and another, praying that among the unwarlike herds a foaming
boar may issue or a tawny lion descend the hill.




[160-194] Meanwhile the sky begins to thicken and roar aloud. A
rain-cloud comes down mingled with hail; the Tyrian train and the men of
Troy, and the Dardanian boy of Venus' son scatter in fear, and seek
shelter far over the fields. Streams pour from the hills. Dido and the
Trojan captain take refuge in the same cavern. Primeval Earth and Juno
the bridesmaid give the sign; fires flash out high in air, witnessing
the union, and Nymphs cry aloud on the mountain-top. That day opened the
gate of death and the springs of ill. For now Dido recks not of eye or
tongue, nor sets her heart on love in secret: she calls it marriage, and
with this name veils her fall.



Straightway Rumour runs through the great cities of Libya,—Rumour, than
whom none other is more swift to mischief; she thrives on restlessness
and gains strength by going: at first small and timorous; soon she lifts
herself on high and paces the ground with head hidden among the clouds.
Her, one saith, Mother Earth, when stung by wrath against the gods, bore
last sister to Coeus and Enceladus, fleet-footed and swift of wing,
ominous, awful, vast; for every feather on her body is a waking eye
beneath, wonderful to tell, and a tongue, and as many loud lips and
straining ears. By night she flits between sky and land, shrilling
through the dusk, and droops not her lids in sweet slumber; in daylight
she sits on guard upon tall towers or the ridge of the house-roof, and
makes great cities afraid; obstinate in perverseness and forgery no less
than messenger of truth. She then exultingly filled the countries with
manifold talk, and blazoned alike what was done and undone: one Aeneas
is come, born of Trojan blood; on him beautiful Dido thinks no shame to
fling herself; now they hold their winter, long-drawn through mutual
caresses, regardless of their realms and enthralled by passionate
dishonour. This the pestilent goddess [195-227] spreads abroad in the
mouths of men, and bends her course right on to King Iarbas, and with
her words fires his spirit and swells his wrath.



He, the seed of Ammon by a ravished Garamantian Nymph, had built to Jove
in his wide realms an hundred great temples, an hundred altars, and
consecrated the wakeful fire that keeps watch by night before the gods
perpetually, where the soil is fat with blood of beasts and the courts
blossom with pied garlands. And he, distracted and on fire at the bitter
tidings, before his altars, amid the divine presences, often, it is
said, bowed in prayer to Jove with uplifted hands:



'Jupiter omnipotent, to whom from the broidered cushions of their
banqueting halls the Maurusian people now pour Lenaean offering, lookest
thou on this? or do we shudder vainly when our father hurls the
thunderbolt, and do blind fires in the clouds and idle rumblings appal
our soul? The woman who, wandering in our coasts, planted a small town
on purchased ground, to whom we gave fields by the shore and laws of
settlement, she hath spurned our alliance and taken Aeneas for lord of
her realm. And now that Paris, with his effeminate crew, his chin and
oozy hair swathed in the turban of Maeonia, takes and keeps her; since
to thy temples we bear oblation, and hallow an empty name.'



In such words he pleaded, clasping the altars; the Lord omnipotent
heard, and cast his eye on the royal city and the lovers forgetful of
their fairer fame. Then he addresses this charge to Mercury:



'Up and away, O son! call the breezes and slide down them on thy wings:
accost the Dardanian captain who now loiters in Tyrian Carthage and
casts not a look on destined cities; carry down my words through the
fleet air. Not such an one did his mother most beautiful vouch him to
[228-264] us, nor for this twice rescue him from Grecian arms; but he
was to rule an Italy teeming with empire and loud with war, to transmit
the line of Teucer's royal blood, and lay all the world beneath his law.
If such glories kindle him in nowise, and he take no trouble for his own
honour, does a father grudge his Ascanius the towers of Rome? with what
device or in what hope loiters he among a hostile race, and casts not a
glance on his Ausonian children and the fields of Lavinium? Let him set
sail: this is the sum: thereof be thou our messenger.'



He ended: his son made ready to obey his high command. And first he
laces to his feet the shoes of gold that bear him high winging over seas
or land as fleet as the gale; then takes the rod wherewith he calls wan
souls forth of Orcus, or sends them again to the sad depth of hell,
gives sleep and takes it away and unseals dead eyes; in whose strength
he courses the winds and swims across the tossing clouds. And now in
flight he descries the peak and steep sides of toiling Atlas, whose
crest sustains the sky; Atlas, whose pine-clad head is girt alway with
black clouds and beaten by wind and rain; snow is shed over his
shoulders for covering; rivers tumble over his aged chin; and his rough
beard is stiff with ice. Here the Cyllenian, poised evenly on his wings,
made a first stay; hence he shot himself sheer to the water. Like a bird
that flies low, skirting the sea about the craggy shores of its fishery,
even thus the brood of Cyllene left his mother's father, and flew,
cutting the winds between sky and land, along the sandy Libyan shore. So
soon as his winged feet reached the settlement, he espies Aeneas
founding towers and ordering new dwellings; his sword twinkled with
yellow jasper, and a cloak hung from his shoulders ablaze with Tyrian
sea-purple, a gift that Dido had made costly and shot the warp with thin
gold. Straightway [265-299] he breaks in: 'Layest thou now the
foundations of tall Carthage, and buildest up a fair city in dalliance?
ah, forgetful of thine own kingdom and state! From bright Olympus I
descend to thee at express command of heaven's sovereign, whose deity
sways sky and earth; expressly he bids me carry this charge through the
fleet air: with what device or in what hope dost thou loiter idly on
Libyan lands? if such glories kindle thee in nowise, yet cast an eye on
growing Ascanius, on Iülus thine hope and heir, to whom the kingdom of
Italy and the Roman land are due.' As these words left his lips the
Cyllenian, yet speaking, quitted mortal sight and vanished into thin air
away out of his eyes.



But Aeneas in truth gazed in dumb amazement, his hair thrilled up, and
the accents faltered on his tongue. He burns to flee away and leave the
pleasant land, aghast at the high warning and divine ordinance. Alas,
what shall he do? how venture to smooth the tale to the frenzied queen?
what prologue shall he find? and this way and that he rapidly throws his
mind, and turns it on all hands in swift change of thought. In his
perplexity this seemed the better counsel; he calls Mnestheus and
Sergestus, and brave Serestus, and bids them silently equip the fleet,
gather their crews on shore, and order their armament, keeping the cause
of the commotion hid; himself meanwhile, since Dido the gracious knows
not nor looks for severance to so strong a love, will essay to approach
her when she may be told most gently, and the way for it be fair. All at
once gladly do as bidden, and obey his command.



But the Queen—who may delude a lover?—foreknew his devices, and at
once caught the presaging stir. Safety's self was fear; to her likewise
had evil Rumour borne the maddening news that they equip the fleet and
prepare [300-334] for passage. Helpless at heart, she reels aflame with
rage throughout the city, even as the startled Thyiad in her frenzied
triennial orgies, when the holy vessels move forth and the cry of
Bacchus re-echoes, and Cithaeron calls her with nightlong din. Thus at
last she opens out upon Aeneas:



'And thou didst hope, traitor, to mask the crime, and slip away in
silence from my land? Our love holds thee not, nor the hand thou once
gavest, nor the bitter death that is left for Dido's portion? Nay, under
the wintry star thou labourest on thy fleet, and hastenest to launch
into the deep amid northern gales; ah, cruel! Why, were thy quest not of
alien fields and unknown dwellings, did thine ancient Troy remain,
should Troy be sought in voyages over tossing seas? Fliest thou from me?
me who by these tears and thine own hand beseech thee, since naught
else, alas! have I kept mine own—by our union and the marriage rites
preparing; if I have done thee any grace, or aught of mine hath once
been sweet in thy sight,—pity our sinking house, and if there yet be
room for prayers, put off this purpose of thine. For thy sake Libyan
tribes and Nomad kings are hostile; my Tyrians are estranged; for thy
sake, thine, is mine honour perished, and the former fame, my one title
to the skies. How leavest thou me to die, O my guest? since to this the
name of husband is dwindled down. For what do I wait? till Pygmalion
overthrow his sister's city, or Gaetulian Iarbas lead me to captivity?
At least if before thy flight a child of thine had been clasped in my
arms,—if a tiny Aeneas were playing in my hall, whose face might yet
image thine,—I would not think myself ensnared and deserted utterly.'



She ended; he by counsel of Jove held his gaze unstirred, and kept his
distress hard down in his heart. At last he briefly answers:



'Never, O Queen, will I deny that thy goodness hath [335-368] gone high
as thy words can swell the reckoning; nor will my memory of Elissa be
ungracious while I remember myself, and breath sways this body. Little
will I say in this. I never hoped to slip away in stealthy flight; fancy
not that; nor did I ever hold out the marriage torch or enter thus into
alliance. Did fate allow me to guide my life by mine own government, and
calm my sorrows as I would, my first duty were to the Trojan city and
the dear remnant of my kindred; the high house of Priam should abide,
and my hand had set up Troy towers anew for a conquered people. But now
for broad Italy hath Apollo of Grynos bidden me steer, for Italy the
oracles of Lycia. Here is my desire; this is my native country. If thy
Phoenician eyes are stayed on Carthage towers and thy Libyan city, what
wrong is it, I pray, that we Trojans find our rest on Ausonian land? We
too may seek a foreign realm unforbidden. In my sleep, often as the dank
shades of night veil the earth, often as the stars lift their fires, the
troubled phantom of my father Anchises comes in warning and dread; my
boy Ascanius, how I wrong one so dear in cheating him of an Hesperian
kingdom and destined fields. Now even the gods' interpreter, sent
straight from Jove—I call both to witness—hath borne down his commands
through the fleet air. Myself in broad daylight I saw the deity passing
within the walls, and these ears drank his utterance. Cease to madden me
and thyself alike with plaints. Not of my will do I follow Italy. . . .'



Long ere he ended she gazes on him askance, turning her eyes from side
to side and perusing him with silent glances; then thus wrathfully
speaks:



'No goddess was thy mother, nor Dardanus founder of thy line, traitor!
but rough Caucasus bore thee on his iron crags, and Hyrcanian tigresses
gave thee suck. For why do I conceal it? For what further outrage do I
wait? [369-400] Hath our weeping cost him a sigh, or a lowered glance?
Hath he broken into tears, or had pity on his lover? Where, where shall
I begin? Now neither doth Queen Juno nor our Saturnian lord regard us
with righteous eyes. Nowhere is trust safe. Cast ashore and destitute I
welcomed him, and madly gave him place and portion in my kingdom; I
found him his lost fleet and drew his crews from death. Alas, the fire
of madness speeds me on. Now prophetic Apollo, now oracles of Lycia, now
the very gods' interpreter sent straight from Jove through the air
carries these rude commands! Truly that is work for the gods, that a
care to vex their peace! I detain thee not, nor gainsay thy words: go,
follow thine Italy down the wind; seek thy realm overseas. Yet midway my
hope is, if righteous gods can do aught at all, thou wilt drain the cup
of vengeance on the rocks, and re-echo calls on Dido's name. In murky
fires I will follow far away, and when chill death hath severed body
from soul, my ghost will haunt thee in every region. Wretch, thou shalt
repay! I will hear; and the rumour of it shall reach me deep in the
under world.'



Even on these words she breaks off her speech unfinished, and, sick at
heart, escapes out of the air and sweeps round and away out of sight,
leaving him in fear and much hesitance, and with much on his mind to
say. Her women catch her in their arms, and carry her swooning to her
marble chamber and lay her on her bed.



But good Aeneas, though he would fain soothe and comfort her grief, and
talk away her distress, with many a sigh, and melted in soul by his
great love, yet fulfils the divine commands and returns to his fleet.
Then indeed the Teucrians set to work, and haul down their tall ships
all along the shore. The hulls are oiled and afloat; they carry from the
woodland green boughs for oars and massy logs unhewn, in hot haste to
go. . . . One might descry them shifting [401-433] their quarters and
pouring out of all the town: even as ants, mindful of winter, plunder a
great heap of wheat and store it in their house; a black column advances
on the plain as they carry home their spoil on a narrow track through
the grass. Some shove and strain with their shoulders at big grains,
some marshal the ranks and chastise delay; all the path is aswarm with
work. What then were thy thoughts, O Dido, as thou sawest it? What sighs
didst thou utter, viewing from the fortress roof the broad beach aswarm,
and seeing before thine eyes the whole sea stirred with their noisy din?
Injurious Love, to what dost thou not compel mortal hearts! Again, she
must needs break into tears, again essay entreaty, and bow her spirit
down to love, not to leave aught untried and go to death in vain.



'Anna, thou seest the bustle that fills the shore. They have gathered
round from every quarter; already their canvas woos the breezes, and the
merry sailors have garlanded the sterns. This great pain, my sister, I
shall have strength to bear, as I have had strength to foresee. Yet this
one thing, Anna, for love and pity's sake—for of thee alone was the
traitor fain, to thee even his secret thoughts were confided, alone thou
knewest his moods and tender fits—go, my sister, and humbly accost the
haughty stranger: I did not take the Grecian oath in Aulis to root out
the race of Troy; I sent no fleet against her fortresses; neither have I
disentombed his father Anchises' ashes and ghost, that he should refuse
my words entrance to his stubborn ears. Whither does he run? let him
grant this grace—alas, the last!—to his lover, and await fair winds
and an easy passage. No more do I pray for the old delusive marriage,
nor that he give up fair Latium and abandon a kingdom. A breathing-space
I ask, to give my madness rest and room, till my very [434-469] fortune
teach my grief submission. This last favour I implore: sister, be
pitiful; grant this to me, and I will restore it in full measure when I
die.'



So she pleaded, and so her sister carries and recarries the piteous tale
of weeping. But by no weeping is he stirred, inflexible to all the words
he hears. Fate withstands, and lays divine bars on unmoved mortal ears.
Even as when the eddying blasts of northern Alpine winds are emulous to
uproot the secular strength of a mighty oak, it wails on, and the trunk
quivers and the high foliage strews the ground; the tree clings fast on
the rocks, and high as her top soars into heaven, so deep strike her
roots to hell; even thus is the hero buffeted with changeful perpetual
accents, and distress thrills his mighty breast, while his purpose stays
unstirred, and tears fall in vain.



Then indeed, hapless and dismayed by doom, Dido prays for death, and is
weary of gazing on the arch of heaven. The more to make her fulfil her
purpose and quit the light, she saw, when she laid her gifts on the
altars alight with incense, awful to tell, the holy streams blacken, and
the wine turn as it poured into ghastly blood. Of this sight she spoke
to none—no, not to her sister. Likewise there was within the house a
marble temple of her ancient lord, kept of her in marvellous honour, and
fastened with snowy fleeces and festal boughs. Forth of it she seemed to
hear her husband's voice crying and calling when night was dim upon
earth, and alone on the house-tops the screech-owl often made moan with
funeral note and long-drawn sobbing cry. Therewithal many a warning of
wizards of old terrifies her with appalling presage. In her sleep fierce
Aeneas drives her wildly, and ever she seems being left by herself
alone, ever going uncompanioned on a weary way, and seeking her Tyrians
in a solitary land: even as frantic Pentheus sees the [470-503] arrayed
Furies and a double sun, and Thebes shows herself twofold to his eyes:
or Agamemnonian Orestes, renowned in tragedy, when his mother pursues
him armed with torches and dark serpents, and the Fatal Sisters crouch
avenging in the doorway.



So when, overcome by her pangs, she caught the madness and resolved to
die, she works out secretly the time and fashion, and accosts her
sorrowing sister with mien hiding her design and hope calm on her brow.



'I have found a way, mine own—wish me joy, sisterlike—to restore him
to me or release me of my love for him. Hard by the ocean limit and the
set of sun is the extreme Aethiopian land, where ancient Atlas turns on
his shoulders the starred burning axletree of heaven. Out of it hath
been shown to me a priestess of Massylian race, warder of the temple of
the Hesperides, even she who gave the dragon his food, and kept the holy
boughs on the tree, sprinkling clammy honey and slumberous poppy-seed.
She professes with her spells to relax the purposes of whom she will,
but on others to bring passion and pain; to stay the river-waters and
turn the stars backward: she calls up ghosts by night; thou shalt see
earth moaning under foot and mountain-ashes descending from the hills. I
take heaven, sweet, to witness, and thee, mine own darling sister, I do
not willingly arm myself with the arts of magic. Do thou secretly raise
a pyre in the inner court, and let them lay on it the arms that the
accursed one left hanging in our chamber, and all the dress he wore, and
the bridal bed where I fell. It is good to wipe out all the wretch's
traces, and the priestess orders thus.' So speaks she, and is silent,
while pallor overruns her face. Yet Anna deems not her sister veils
death behind these strange rites, and grasps not her wild purpose, nor
fears aught deeper than at Sychaeus' death. So she makes ready as
bidden. . . .



[504-538] But the Queen, the pyre being built up of piled faggots and
sawn ilex in the inmost of her dwelling, hangs the room with chaplets
and garlands it with funeral boughs: on the pillow she lays the dress he
wore, the sword he left, and an image of him, knowing what was to come.
Altars are reared around, and the priestess, with hair undone, thrice
peals from her lips the hundred gods of Erebus and Chaos, and the
triform Hecate, the triple-faced maidenhood of Diana. Likewise she had
sprinkled pretended waters of Avernus' spring, and rank herbs are sought
mown by moonlight with brazen sickles, dark with milky venom, and sought
is the talisman torn from a horse's forehead at birth ere the dam could
snatch it. . . . Herself, the holy cake in her pure hands, hard by the
altars, with one foot unshod and garments flowing loose, she invokes the
gods ere she die, and the stars that know of doom; then prays to
whatsoever deity looks in righteousness and remembrance on lovers ill
allied.



Night fell; weary creatures took quiet slumber all over earth, and
woodland and wild waters had sunk to rest; now the stars wheel midway on
their gliding path, now all the country is silent, and beasts and gay
birds that haunt liquid levels of lake or thorny rustic thicket lay
couched asleep under the still night. But not so the distressed
Phoenician, nor does she ever sink asleep or take the night upon eyes or
breast; her pain redoubles, and her love swells to renewed madness, as
she tosses on the strong tide of wrath. Even so she begins, and thus
revolves with her heart alone:



'See, what do I? Shall I again make trial of mine old wooers that will
scorn me? and stoop to sue for a Numidian marriage among those whom
already over and over I have disdained for husbands? Then shall I follow
the Ilian fleets and the uttermost bidding of the Teucrians? because it
is good to think they were once raised up by my [539-570] succour, or
the grace of mine old kindness is fresh in their remembrance? And how
should they let me, if I would? or take the odious woman on their
haughty ships? art thou ignorant, ah me, even in ruin, and knowest not
yet the forsworn race of Laomedon? And then? shall I accompany the
triumphant sailors, a lonely fugitive? or plunge forth girt with all my
Tyrian train? so hardly severed from Sidon city, shall I again drive
them seaward, and bid them spread their sails to the tempest? Nay die
thou, as thou deservest, and let the steel end thy pain. With thee it
began; overborne by my tears, thou, O my sister, dost load me with this
madness and agony, and layest me open to the enemy. I could not spend a
wild life without stain, far from a bridal chamber, and free from touch
of distress like this! O faith ill kept, that was plighted to Sychaeus'
ashes!' Thus her heart broke in long lamentation.



Now Aeneas was fixed to go, and now, with all set duly in order, was
taking hasty sleep on his high stern. To him as he slept the god
appeared once again in the same fashion of countenance, and thus seemed
to renew his warning, in all points like to Mercury, voice and hue and
golden hair and limbs gracious in youth. 'Goddess-born, canst thou sleep
on in such danger? and seest not the coming perils that hem thee in,
madman! nor hearest the breezes blowing fair? She, fixed on death, is
revolving craft and crime grimly in her bosom, and swells the changing
surge of wrath. Fliest thou not hence headlong, while headlong flight is
yet possible? Even now wilt thou see ocean weltering with broken
timbers, see the fierce glare of torches and the beach in a riot of
flame, if dawn break on thee yet dallying in this land. Up ho! linger no
more! Woman is ever a fickle and changing thing.' So spoke he, and
melted in the black night.




[571-603] Then indeed Aeneas, startled by the sudden phantom, leaps out
of slumber and bestirs his crew. 'Haste and awake, O men, and sit down
to the thwarts; shake out sail speedily. A god sent from high heaven,
lo! again spurs us to speed our flight and cut the twisted cables. We
follow thee, holy one of heaven, whoso thou art, and again joyfully obey
thy command. O be favourable; give gracious aid and bring fair sky and
weather.' He spoke, and snatching his sword like lightning from the
sheath, strikes at the hawser with the drawn steel. The same zeal
catches all at once; rushing and tearing they quit the shore; the sea is
hidden under their fleets; strongly they toss up the foam and sweep the
blue water.



And now Dawn broke, and, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus, shed her
radiance anew over the world; when the Queen saw from her watch-tower
the first light whitening, and the fleet standing out under squared
sail, and discerned shore and haven empty of all their oarsmen. Thrice
and four times she struck her hand on her lovely breast and rent her
yellow hair: 'God!' she cries, 'shall he go? shall an alien make mock of
our realm? Will they not issue in armed pursuit from all the city, and
some launch ships from the dockyards? Go; bring fire in haste, serve
weapons, swing out the oars! What do I talk? or where am I? what mad
change is on my purpose? Alas, Dido! now thou dost feel thy wickedness;
that had graced thee once, when thou gavest away thy crown. Behold the
faith and hand of him! who, they say, carries his household's ancestral
gods about with him! who stooped his shoulders to a father outworn with
age! Could I not have riven his body in sunder and strewn it on the
waves? and slain with the sword his comrades and his dear Ascanius, and
served him for the banquet at his father's table? But the chance of
battle had been dubious. If it had! whom did I fear [604-635] with my
death upon me? I should have borne firebrands into his camp and filled
his decks with flame, blotted out father and son and race together, and
flung myself atop of all. Sun, whose fires lighten all the works of the
world, and thou, Juno, mediatress and witness of these my distresses,
and Hecate, cried on by night in crossways of cities, and you, fatal
avenging sisters and gods of dying Elissa, hear me now; bend your just
deity to my woes, and listen to our prayers. If it must needs be that
the accursed one touch his haven and float up to land, if thus Jove's
decrees demand, and this is the appointed term,—yet, distressed in war
by an armed and gallant nation, driven homeless from his borders, rent
from Iülus' embrace, let him sue for succour and see death on death
untimely on his people; nor when he hath yielded him to the terms of a
harsh peace, may he have joy of his kingdom or the pleasant light; but
let him fall before his day and without burial on a waste of sand. This
I pray; this and my blood with it I pour for the last utterance. And
you, O Tyrians, hunt his seed with your hatred for all ages to come;
send this guerdon to our ashes. Let no kindness nor truce be between the
nations. Arise out of our dust, O unnamed avenger, to pursue the
Dardanian settlement with firebrand and steel. Now, then, whensoever
strength shall be given, I invoke the enmity of shore to shore, wave to
water, sword to sword; let their battles go down to their children's
children.'



So speaks she as she kept turning her mind round about, seeking how
soonest to break away from the hateful light. Thereon she speaks briefly
to Barce, nurse of Sychaeus; for a heap of dusky ashes held her own, in
her country of long ago:



'Sweet nurse, bring Anna my sister hither to me. Bid her haste and
sprinkle river water over her body, and bring [636-667] with her the
beasts ordained for expiation: so let her come: and thou likewise veil
thy brows with a pure chaplet. I would fulfil the rites of Stygian Jove
that I have fitly ordered and begun, so to set the limit to my
distresses and give over to the flames the funeral pyre of the
Dardanian.'



So speaks she; the old woman went eagerly with quickened pace. But Dido,
fluttered and fierce in her awful purpose, with bloodshot restless gaze,
and spots on her quivering cheeks burning through the pallor of imminent
death, bursts into the inner courts of the house, and mounts in madness
the high funeral pyre, and unsheathes the sword of Dardania, a gift
asked for no use like this. Then after her eyes fell on the Ilian
raiment and the bed she knew, dallying a little with her purpose through
her tears, she sank on the pillow and spoke the last words of all:



'Dress he wore, sweet while doom and deity allowed! receive my spirit
now, and release me from my distresses. I have lived and fulfilled
Fortune's allotted course; and now shall I go a queenly phantom under
the earth. I have built a renowned city; I have seen my ramparts rise;
by my brother's punishment I have avenged my husband of his enemy;
happy, ah me! and over happy, had but the keels of Dardania never
touched our shores!' She spoke; and burying her face in the pillow,
'Death it will be,' she cries, 'and unavenged; but death be it. Thus,
thus is it good to pass into the dark. Let the pitiless Dardanian's gaze
drink in this fire out at sea, and my death be the omen he carries on
his way.'



She ceased; and even as she spoke her people see her sunk on the steel,
and blood reeking on the sword and spattered on her hands. A cry rises
in the high halls; Rumour riots down the quaking city. The house
resounds with lamentation and sobbing and bitter crying of women;
[668-700] heaven echoes their loud wails; even as though all Carthage or
ancient Tyre went down as the foe poured in, and the flames rolled
furious over the roofs of house and temple. Swooning at the sound, her
sister runs in a flutter of dismay, with torn face and smitten bosom,
and darts through them all, and calls the dying woman by her name. 'Was
it this, mine own? Was my summons a snare? Was it this thy pyre, ah me,
this thine altar fires meant? How shall I begin my desolate moan? Didst
thou disdain a sister's company in death? Thou shouldst have called me
to share thy doom; in the self-same hour, the self-same pang of steel
had been our portion. Did these very hands build it, did my voice call
on our father's gods, that with thee lying thus I should be away as one
without pity? Thou hast destroyed thyself and me together, O my sister,
and the Sidonian lords and people, and this thy city. Give her wounds
water: I will bathe them and catch on my lips the last breath that haply
yet lingers.' So speaking she had climbed the high steps, and, wailing,
clasped and caressed her half-lifeless sister in her bosom, and stanched
the dark streams of blood with her gown. She, essaying to lift her heavy
eyes, swoons back; the deep-driven wound gurgles in her breast. Thrice
she rose, and strained to lift herself on her elbow; thrice she rolled
back on the pillow, and with wandering eyes sought the light of high
heaven, and moaned as she found it.



Then Juno omnipotent, pitying her long pain and difficult decease, sent
Iris down from heaven to unloose the struggling life from the body where
it clung. For since neither by fate did she perish, nor as one who had
earned her death, but woefully before her day, and fired by sudden
madness, not yet had Proserpine taken her lock from the golden head, nor
sentenced her to the Stygian under world. So Iris on dewy saffron
pinions flits down through the sky [701-705] athwart the sun in a trail
of a thousand changing dyes, and stopping over her head: 'This hair,
sacred to Dis, I take as bidden, and release thee from that body of
thine.' So speaks she, and cuts it with her hand. And therewith all the
warmth ebbed forth from her, and the life passed away upon the winds.

=== AENEID BOOK 5 ===

THE GAMES OF THE FLEET 


Meanwhile Aeneas and his fleet in unwavering track now held mid passage,
and cleft the waves that blackened under the North, looking back on the
city that even now gleams with hapless Elissa's funeral flame. Why the
broad blaze is lit lies unknown; but the bitter pain of a great love
trampled, and the knowledge of what woman can do in madness, draw the
Teucrians' hearts to gloomy guesses.



When their ships held the deep, nor any land farther appears, the seas
all round, and all round the sky, a dusky shower drew up overhead,
carrying night and storm, and the wave shuddered and gloomed. Palinurus,
master of the fleet, cries from the high stern: 'Alas, why have these
heavy storm-clouds girt the sky? lord Neptune, what wilt thou?' Then he
bids clear the rigging and bend strongly to the oars, and brings the
sails across the wind, saying thus:



'Noble Aeneas, not did Jupiter give word and warrant would I hope to
reach Italy under such a sky. The shifting winds roar athwart our
course, and blow stronger out of the black west, and the air thickens
into mist: nor are we fit to force our way on and across. Fortune is the
stronger; let us follow her, and turn our course whither she calls.
[23-55] Not far away, I think, are the faithful shores of thy brother
Eryx, and the Sicilian haven, if only my memory retraces rightly the
stars I watched before.'



Then good Aeneas: 'Even I ere now discern the winds will have it so, and
thou urgest against them in vain. Turn thou the course of our sailing.
Could any land be welcomer to me, or where I would sooner choose to put
in my weary ships, than this that hath Dardanian Acestes to greet me,
and laps in its embrace lord Anchises' dust?' This said, they steer for
harbour, while the following west wind stretches their sails; the fleet
runs fast down the flood, and at last they land joyfully on the familiar
beach. But Acestes high on a hill-top, amazed at the friendly squadron
approaching from afar, hastens towards them, weaponed and clad in the
shaggy skin of a Libyan she-bear. Him a Trojan mother conceived and bore
to Crimisus river; not forgetful of his parentage, he wishes them joy of
their return, and gladly entertains them on his rustic treasure and
comforts their weariness with his friendly store. So soon as the
morrow's clear daylight had chased the stars out of the east, Aeneas
calls his comrades along the beach together, and from a mounded hillock
speaks:



'Great people of Dardanus, born of the high blood of gods, the yearly
circle of the months is measured out to fulfilment since we laid the
dust in earth, all that was left of my divine father, and sadly
consecrated our altars. And now the day is at hand (this, O gods, was
your will), which I will ever keep in grief, ever in honour. Did I spend
it an exile on Gaetulian quicksands, did it surprise me on the Argolic
sea or in Mycenae town, yet would I fulfil the yearly vows and annual
ordinance of festival, and pile the altars with their due gifts. Now we
are led hither, to the very dust and ashes of our father, not as I deem
without [56-90] divine purpose and influence, and borne home into the
friendly haven. Up then and let us all gather joyfully to the sacrifice:
pray we for winds, and may he deign that I pay these rites to him year
by year in an established city and consecrated temple. Two head of oxen
Acestes, the seed of Troy, gives to each of your ships by tale: invite
to the feast your own ancestral gods of the household, and those whom
our host Acestes worships. Further, so the ninth Dawn uplift the
gracious day upon men, and her shafts unveil the world, I will ordain
contests for my Trojans; first for swift ships; then whoso excels in the
foot-race, and whoso, confident in strength and skill, comes to shoot
light arrows, or adventures to join battle with gloves of raw hide; let
all be here, and let merit look for the prize and palm. Now all be
hushed, and twine your temples with boughs.'



So speaks he, and shrouds his brows with his mother's myrtle. So Helymus
does, so Aletes ripe of years, so the boy Ascanius, and the rest of the
people follow. He advances from the assembly to the tomb among a throng
of many thousands that crowd about him; here he pours on the ground in
fit libation two goblets of pure wine, two of new milk, two of
consecrated blood, and flings bright blossoms, saying thus: 'Hail, holy
father, once again; hail, ashes of him I saved in vain, and soul and
shade of my sire! Thou wert not to share the search for Italian borders
and destined fields, nor the dim Ausonian Tiber.' Thus had he spoken;
when from beneath the sanctuary a snake slid out in seven vast coils and
sevenfold slippery spires, quietly circling the grave and gliding from
altar to altar, his green chequered body and the spotted lustre of his
scales ablaze with gold, as the bow in the cloud darts a thousand
changing dyes athwart the sun: Aeneas stood amazed at the sight. At last
he wound [91-126] his long train among the vessels and polished cups,
and tasted the feast, and again leaving the altars where he had fed,
crept harmlessly back beneath the tomb. Doubtful if he shall think it
the Genius of the ground or his father's ministrant, he slays, as is
fit, two sheep of two years old, as many swine and dark-backed steers,
pouring the while cups of wine, and calling on the soul of great
Anchises and the ghost rearisen from Acheron. Therewithal his comrades,
as each hath store, bring gifts to heap joyfully on the altars, and slay
steers in sacrifice: others set cauldrons arow, and, lying along the
grass, heap live embers under spits and roast the flesh.



The desired day came, and now the ninth Dawn rode up clear and bright
behind Phaëthon's coursers; and the name and renown of illustrious
Acestes had stirred up all the bordering people; their holiday throng
filled the shore, to see Aeneas' men, and some ready to join in contest.
First of all the prizes are laid out to view in the middle of the
racecourse; tripods of sacrifice, green garlands and palms, the reward
of the conquerors, armour and garments dipped in purple, talents of
silver and gold: and from a hillock in the midst the trumpet sounds the
games begun. First is the contest of rowing, and four ships matched in
weight enter, the choice of all the fleet. Mnestheus' keen oarsmen drive
the swift Dragon, Mnestheus the Italian to be, from whose name is the
Memmian family; Gyas the huge bulk of the huge Chimaera, a floating
town, whom her triple-tiered Dardanian crew urge on with oars rising in
threefold rank; Sergestus, from whom the Sergian house holds her name,
sails in the tall Centaur; and in the sea-coloured Scylla Cloanthus,
whence is thy family, Cluentius of Rome.



Apart in the sea and over against the foaming beach, lies a rock that
the swoln waves beat and drown what time the [127-159] north-western
gales of winter blot out the stars; in calm it rises silent out of the
placid water, flat-topped, and a haunt where cormorants love best to
take the sun. Here lord Aeneas set up a goal of leafy ilex, a mark for
the sailors to know whence to return, where to wheel their long course
round. Then they choose stations by lot, and on the sterns their
captains glitter afar, beautiful in gold and purple; the rest of the
crews are crowned with poplar sprays, and their naked shoulders glisten
wet with oil. They sit down at the thwarts, and their arms are tense on
the oars; at full strain they wait the signal, while throbbing fear and
heightened ambition drain their riotous blood. Then, when the clear
trumpet-note rang, all in a moment leap forward from their line; the
shouts of the sailors strike up to heaven, and the channels are swept
into foam by the arms as they swing backward. They cleave their furrows
together, and all the sea is torn asunder by oars and triple-pointed
prows. Not with speed so headlong do racing pairs whirl the chariots
over the plain, as they rush streaming from the barriers; not so do
their charioteers shake the wavy reins loose over their team, and hang
forward on the whip. All the woodland rings with clapping and shouts of
men that cheer their favourites, and the sheltered beach eddies back
their cries; the noise buffets and re-echoes from the hills. Gyas shoots
out in front of the noisy crowd, and glides foremost along the water;
whom Cloanthus follows next, rowing better, but held back by his
dragging weight of pine. After them, at equal distance, the Dragon and
the Centaur strive to win the foremost room; and now the Dragon has it,
now the vast Centaur outstrips and passes her; now they dart on both
together, their stems in a line, and their keels driving long furrows
through the salt water-ways. And now they drew nigh the rock, and were
hard [160-193] on the goal; when Gyas as he led, winner over half the
flood, cries aloud to Menoetes, the ship's steersman: 'Whither away so
far to the right? This way direct her path; kiss the shore, and let the
oarblade graze the leftward reefs. Others may keep to deep water.' He
spoke; but Menoetes, fearing blind rocks, turns the bow away towards the
open sea. 'Whither wanderest thou away? to the rocks, Menoetes!' again
shouts Gyas to bring him back; and lo! glancing round he sees Cloanthus
passing up behind and keeping nearer. Between Gyas' ship and the echoing
crags he scrapes through inside on his left, flashes past his leader,
and leaving the goal behind is in safe water. Then indeed grief burned
fierce through his strong frame, and tears sprung out on his cheeks;
heedless of his own dignity and his crew's safety, he flings the too
cautious Menoetes sheer into the sea from the high stern, himself
succeeds as guide and master of the helm, and cheers on his men, and
turns his tiller in to shore. But Menoetes, when at last he rose
struggling from the bottom, heavy with advancing years and wet in his
dripping clothes, makes for the top of the crag, and sits down on a dry
rock. The Teucrians laughed out as he fell and as he swam, and laugh to
see him spitting the salt water from his chest. At this a joyful hope
kindled in the two behind, Sergestus and Mnestheus, of catching up Gyas'
wavering course. Sergestus slips forward as he nears the rock, yet not
all in front, nor leading with his length of keel; part is in front,
part pressed by the Dragon's jealous prow. But striding amidships
between his comrades, Mnestheus cheers them on: 'Now, now swing back,
oarsmen who were Hector's comrades, whom I chose to follow me in Troy's
extremity; now put forth the might and courage you showed in Gaetulian
quicksands, amid Ionian seas and Malea's chasing waves. Not the first
[194-227] place do I now seek for Mnestheus, nor strive for victory;
though ah!—yet let them win, O Neptune, to whom thou givest it. But the
shame of coming in last! Win but this, fellow-citizens, and avert that
disaster!' His men bend forward, straining every muscle; the brasswork
of the ship quivers to their mighty strokes, and the ground runs from
under her; limbs and parched lips shake with their rapid panting, and
sweat flows in streams all over them. Mere chance brought the crew the
glory they desired. For while Sergestus drives his prow furiously in
towards the rocks and comes up with too scanty room, alas! he caught on
a rock that ran out; the reef ground, the oars struck and shivered on
the jagged teeth, and the bows crashed and hung. The sailors leap up and
hold her with loud cries, and get out iron-shod poles and sharp-pointed
boathooks, and pick up their broken oars out of the eddies. But
Mnestheus, rejoicing and flushed by his triumph, with oars fast-dipping
and winds at his call, issues into the shelving water and runs down the
open sea. As a pigeon whose house and sweet nestlings are in the rock's
recesses, if suddenly startled from her cavern, wings her flight over
the fields and rushes frightened from her house with loud clapping
pinions; then gliding noiselessly through the air, slides on her liquid
way and moves not her rapid wings; so Mnestheus, so the Dragon under him
swiftly cleaves the last space of sea, so her own speed carries her
flying on. And first Sergestus is left behind, struggling on the steep
rock and shoal water, and shouting in vain for help and learning to race
with broken oars. Next he catches up Gyas and the vast bulk of the
Chimaera; she gives way, without her steersman. And now on the very goal
Cloanthus alone is left; him he pursues and presses hard, straining all
his strength. Then indeed the shouts redouble, as all together eagerly
cheer on the pursuer, and [228-264] the sky echoes their din. These
scorn to lose the honour that is their own, the glory in their grasp,
and would sell life for renown; to these success lends life; power comes
with belief in it. And haply they had carried the prize with prows
abreast, had not Cloanthus, stretching both his open hands over the sea,
poured forth prayers and called the gods to hear his vows: 'Gods who are
sovereign on the sea, over whose waters I run, to your altars on this
beach will I bring a snow-white bull, my vow's glad penalty, and will
cast his entrails into the salt flood and pour liquid wine.' He spoke,
and far beneath the flood maiden Panopea heard him, with all Phorcus'
choir of Nereids, and lord Portunus with his own mighty hand pushed him
on his way. The ship flies to land swifter than the wind or an arrow's
flight, and shoots into the deep harbour. Then the seed of Anchises,
summoning all in order, declares Cloanthus conqueror by herald's outcry,
and dresses his brows in green bay, and gives gifts to each crew, three
bullocks of their choice, and wine, and a large talent of silver to take
away. For their captains he adds special honours; to the winner a scarf
wrought with gold, encircled by a double border of deep Meliboean
purple; woven in it is the kingly boy on leafy Ida, chasing swift stags
with javelin and racing feet, keen and as one panting; him Jove's
swooping armour-bearer hath caught up from Ida in his talons; his aged
guardians stretch their hands vainly upwards, and the barking of hounds
rings fierce into the air. But to him who, next in merit, held the
second place, he gives to wear a corslet triple-woven with hooks of
polished gold, stripped by his own conquering hand from Demoleos under
tall Troy by the swift Simoïs, an ornament and safeguard among arms.
Scarce could the straining shoulders of his servants Phegeus and Sagaris
carry its heavy folds; yet with it on, Demoleos at [265-302] full speed
would chase the scattered Trojans. The third prize he makes twin
cauldrons of brass, and bowls wrought in silver and rough with tracery.
And now all moved away in the pride and wealth of their prizes, their
brows bound with scarlet ribbons; when, hardly torn loose by all his art
from the cruel rock, his oars lost, rowing feebly with a single tier,
Sergestus brought in his ship jeered at and unhonoured. Even as often a
serpent caught on a highway, if a brazen wheel hath gone aslant over him
or a wayfarer left him half dead and mangled with the blow of a heavy
stone, wreathes himself slowly in vain effort to escape, in part
undaunted, his eyes ablaze and his hissing throat lifted high; in part
the disabling wound keeps him coiling in knots and twisting back on his
own body; so the ship kept rowing slowly on, yet hoists sail and under
full sail glides into the harbour mouth. Glad that the ship is saved and
the crew brought back, Aeneas presents Sergestus with his promised
reward. A slave woman is given him not unskilled in Minerva's labours,
Pholoë the Cretan, with twin boys at her breast.



This contest sped, good Aeneas moved to a grassy plain girt all about
with winding wooded hills, and amid the valley an amphitheatre, whither,
with a concourse of many thousands, the hero advanced and took his seat
on a mound. Here he allures with rewards and offer of prizes those who
will try their hap in the fleet foot-race. Trojans and Sicilians gather
mingling from all sides, Nisus and Euryalus foremost . . . Euryalus in the
flower of youth and famed for beauty, Nisus for pure love of the boy.
Next follows renowned Diores, of Priam's royal line; after him Salius
and Patron together, the one Acarnanian, the other Tegean by family and
of Arcadian blood; next two men of Sicily, Helymus and Panopes,
foresters and attendants on old Acestes; many besides whose fame is hid
in [303-338] obscurity. Then among them all Aeneas spoke thus: 'Hearken
to this, and attend in good cheer. None out of this number will I let go
without a gift. To each will I give two glittering Gnosian spearheads of
polished steel, and an axe chased with silver to bear away; one and all
shall be honoured thus. The three foremost shall receive prizes, and
have pale olive bound about their head. The first shall have a
caparisoned horse as conqueror; the second an Amazonian quiver filled
with arrows of Thrace, girt about by a broad belt of gold, and on the
link of the clasp a polished gem; let the third depart with this Argolic
helmet for recompense.' This said, they take their place, and the signal
once heard, dart over the course and leave the line, pouring forth like
a storm-cloud while they mark the goal. Nisus gets away first, and
shoots out far in front of the throng, fleeter than the winds or the
winged thunderbolt. Next to him, but next by a long gap, Salius follows;
then, left a space behind him, Euryalus third . . . and Helymus comes
after Euryalus; and close behind him, lo! Diores goes flying, just
grazing foot with foot, hard on his shoulder; and if a longer space were
left, he would creep out past him and win the tie. And now almost in the
last space, they began to come up breathless to the goal, when
unfortunate Nisus trips on the slippery blood of the slain steers, where
haply it had spilled over the ground and wetted the green grass. Here,
just in the flush of victory, he lost his feet; they slid away on the
ground they pressed, and he fell forward right among the ordure and
blood of the sacrifice. Yet forgot he not his darling Euryalus; for
rising, he flung himself over the slippery ground in front of Salius,
and he rolled over and lay all along on the hard sand. Euryalus shoots
by, wins and holds the first place his friend gave, and flies on amid
prosperous clapping and cheers. Behind Helymus comes [339-373] up, and
Diores, now third for the palm. At this Salius fills with loud clamour
the whole concourse of the vast theatre, and the lords who looked on in
front, demanding restoration of his defrauded prize. Euryalus is strong
in favour, and beauty in tears, and the merit that gains grace from so
fair a form. Diores supports him, who succeeded to the palm, so he
loudly cries, and bore off the last prize in vain, if the highest
honours be restored to Salius. Then lord Aeneas speaks: 'For you, O
boys, your rewards remain assured, and none alters the prizes' order:
let me be allowed to pity a friend's innocent mischance.' So speaking,
he gives to Salius a vast Gaetulian lion-skin, with shaggy masses of
hair and claws of gold. 'If this,' cries Nisus, 'is the reward of
defeat, and thy pity is stirred for the fallen, what fit recompense wilt
thou give to Nisus? to my excellence the first crown was due, had not I,
like Salius, met Fortune's hostility.' And with the words he displayed
his face and limbs foul with the wet dung. His lord laughed kindly on
him, and bade a shield be brought forth, the workmanship of Didymaon,
torn by him from the hallowed gates of Neptune's Grecian temple; with
this special prize he rewards his excellence.



Thereafter, when the races are finished and the gifts fulfilled: 'Now,'
he cries, 'come, whoso hath in him valour and ready heart, and lift up
his arms with gauntleted hands.' So speaks he, and sets forth a double
prize of battle; for the conqueror a bullock gilt and garlanded; a sword
and beautiful helmet to console the conquered. Straightway without pause
Dares issues to view in his vast strength, rising amid loud murmurs of
the people; he who alone was wont to meet Paris in combat; he who, at
the mound where princely Hector lies, struck down as he came the vast
bulk upborne by conquering Butes, of Amycus' Bebrycian line, and
stretched him in [374-410] death on the yellow sand. Such was Dares; at
once he raises his head high for battle, displays his broad shoulders,
and stretches and swings his arms right and left, lashing the air with
blows. For him another is required; but none out of all the train durst
approach or put the gloves on his hands. So he takes his stand exultant
before Aeneas' feet, deeming he excelled all in victories; and thereon
without more delay grasps the bull's horn with his left hand, and speaks
thus: 'Goddess-born, if no man dare trust himself to battle, to what
conclusion shall I stand? how long is it seemly to keep me? bid me carry
off thy gifts.' Therewith all the Dardanians murmured assent, and bade
yield him the promised prize. At this aged Acestes spoke sharply to
Entellus, as he sate next him on the green cushion of grass: 'Entellus,
bravest of heroes once of old in vain, wilt thou thus idly let a gift so
great be borne away uncontested? Where now prithee is divine Eryx, thy
master of fruitless fame? where thy renown over all Sicily, and those
spoils hanging in thine house?' Thereat he: 'Desire of glory is not
gone, nor ambition checked by fear; but torpid age dulls my chilly
blood, and my strength of limb is numb and outworn. If I had what once
was mine, if I had now that prime of years, yonder braggart's boast and
confidence, it had taken no prize of goodly bullock to allure me; nor
heed I these gifts.' So he spoke, and on that flung down a pair of
gloves of giant weight, with whose hard hide bound about his wrists
valiant Eryx was wont to come to battle. They stood amazed; so stiff and
grim lay the vast sevenfold oxhide sewed in with lead and iron. Dares
most of all shrinks far back in horror, and the noble son of Anchises
turns round this way and that their vast weight and voluminous folds.
Then the old man spoke thus in deep accents: 'How, had they seen the
gloves [411-444] that were Hercules' own armour, and the fatal fight on
this very beach? These arms thy brother Eryx once wore; thou seest them
yet stained with blood and spattered brains. In them he stood to face
great Alcides; to them was I used while fuller blood supplied me
strength, and envious old age had not yet strewn her snows on either
temple. But if Dares of Troy will have none of these our arms, and good
Aeneas is resolved on it, and my patron Acestes approves, let us make
the battle even. See, I give up the gauntlets of Eryx; dismiss thy
fears; and do thou put off thy Trojan gloves.' So spoke he, and throwing
back the fold of his raiment from his shoulders, he bares the massive
joints and limbs, the great bones and muscles, and stands up huge in the
middle of the ground. Then Anchises' lordly seed brought out equal
gloves and bound the hands of both in matched arms. Straightway each
took his stand on tiptoe, and undauntedly raised his arms high in air.
They lift their heads right back and away out of reach of blows, and
make hand play through hand, inviting attack; the one nimbler of foot
and confident in his youth, the other mighty in mass of limb, but his
knees totter tremulous and slow, and sick panting shakes his vast frame.
Many a mutual blow they deliver in vain, many an one they redouble on
chest and side, sounding hollow and loud: hands play fast about ear and
temple, and jawbones clash under the hard strokes. Old Entellus stands
immoveable and astrain, only parrying hits with body and watchful eye.
The other, as one who casts mounts against some high city or blockades a
hill-fort in arms, tries this and that entrance, and ranges cunningly
over all the ground, and presses many an attack in vain. Entellus rose
and struck clean out with his right downwards; his quick opponent saw
the descending blow before it came, [445-481] and slid his body rapidly
out of its way. Entellus hurled his strength into the air, and all his
heavy mass, overreaching, fell heavily to the earth; as sometime on
Erymanthus or mighty Ida a hollow pine falls torn out by the roots.
Teucrians and men of Sicily rise eagerly; a cry goes up, and Acestes
himself runs forward, and pityingly lifts his friend and birthmate from
the ground. But the hero, not dulled nor dismayed by his mishap, returns
the keener to battle, and grows violent in wrath, while shame and
resolved valour kindle his strength. All afire, he hunts Dares headlong
over the lists, and redoubles his blows now with right hand, now with
left; no breath nor pause; heavy as hailstones rattle on the roof from a
storm-cloud, so thickly shower the blows from both his hands as he
buffets Dares to and fro. Then lord Aeneas allowed not wrath to swell
higher or Entellus to rage out his bitterness, but stopped the fight and
rescued the exhausted Dares, saying thus in soothing words: 'Unhappy!
what height of madness hath seized thy mind? Knowest thou not the
strength is another's and the gods are changed? Yield thou to Heaven.'
And with the words he proclaimed the battle over. But him his faithful
mates lead to the ships dragging his knees feebly, swaying his head from
side to side, and spitting from his mouth clotted blood mingled with
teeth. At summons they bear away the helmet and shield, and leave palm
and bull to Entellus. At this the conqueror, swelling in pride over the
bull, cries: 'Goddess-born, and you, O Trojans! learn thus what my
strength of body was in its prime, and from what a death Dares is saved
by your recall.' He spoke, and stood right opposite in face of the
bullock as it stood by, the prize of battle; then drew back his hand,
and swinging the hard gauntlet sheer down between the horns, smashed the
bones in upon the shattered brain. The ox rolls over, and quivering and
[482-516] lifeless lies along the ground. Above it he utters these deep
accents: 'This life, Eryx, I give to thee, a better payment than Dares'
death; here I lay down my gloves and unconquered skill.'



Forthwith Aeneas invites all that will to the contest of the swift
arrow, and proclaims the prizes. With his strong hand he uprears the
mast of Serestus' ship, and on a cord crossing it hangs from the
masthead a fluttering pigeon as mark for their steel. They gather, and a
helmet of brass takes the lots as they throw them in. First in rank, and
before them all, amid prosperous cheers, comes out Hippocoön son of
Hyrtacus; and Mnestheus follows on him, but now conqueror in the ship
race, Mnestheus with his chaplet of green olive. Third is Eurytion, thy
brother, O Pandarus, great in renown, thou who of old, when prompted to
shatter the truce, didst hurl the first shaft amid the Achaeans. Last of
all, and at the bottom of the helmet, sank Acestes, he too venturing to
set hand to the task of youth. Then each and all they strongly bend
their bows into a curve and pull shafts from their quivers. And first
the arrow of the son of Hyrtacus, flying through heaven from the
sounding string, whistles through the fleet breezes, and reaches and
sticks fast full in the mast's wood: the mast quivered, and the bird
fluttered her feathers in affright, and the whole ground rang with loud
clapping. Next valiant Mnestheus took his stand with bow bent, aiming
high with levelled eye and arrow; yet could not, unfortunate! hit the
bird herself with his steel, but cut the knotted hempen bands that tied
her foot as she hung from the masthead; she winged her flight into the
dark windy clouds. Then Eurytion, who ere now held the arrow ready on
his bended bow, swiftly called in prayer to his brother, marked the
pigeon as she now went down the empty sky exultant on clapping wings;
and as she passed under a dark cloud, [517-553] struck her: she fell
breathless, and, leaving her life in the aery firmament, slid down
carrying the arrow that pierced her. Acestes alone was over, and the
prize lost; yet he sped his arrow up into the air, to display his lordly
skill and resounding bow. At this a sudden sign meets their eyes, mighty
in augural presage, as the high event taught thereafter, and in late
days boding seers prophesied of the omen. For the flying reed blazed out
amid the swimming clouds, traced its path in flame, and burned away on
the light winds; even as often stars shooting from their sphere draw a
train athwart the sky. Trinacrians and Trojans hung in astonishment,
praying to the heavenly powers; neither did great Aeneas reject the
omen, but embraces glad Acestes and loads him with lavish gifts,
speaking thus: 'Take, my lord: for the high King of heaven by these
signs hath willed thee to draw the lot of peculiar honour. This gift
shalt thou have as from aged Anchises' own hand, a bowl embossed with
figures, that once Cisseus of Thrace gave my father Anchises to bear, in
high token and guerdon of affection.' So speaking, he twines green bay
about his brows, and proclaims Acestes conqueror first before them all.
Nor did gentle Eurytion, though he alone struck the bird down from the
lofty sky, grudge him to be preferred in honour. Next comes for his
prize he who cut the cord; he last, who pierced the mast with his winged
reed.



But lord Aeneas, ere yet the contest is sped, calls to him Epytides,
guardian and attendant of ungrown Iülus, and thus speaks into his
faithful ear: 'Up and away, and tell Ascanius, if he now holds his band
of boys ready, and their horses arrayed for the charge, to defile his
squadrons to his grandsire's honour in bravery of arms.' So says he, and
himself bids all the crowding throng withdraw from the long racecourse
and leave the lists free. The boys move in before their parents' faces,
glittering in rank on their [554-590] bitted horses; as they go all the
people of Troy and Trinacria murmur and admire. On the hair of them all
rests a garland fitly trimmed; each carries two cornel spear-shafts
tipped with steel; some have polished quivers on their shoulders; above
their breast and round their neck goes a flexible circlet of twisted
gold. Three in number are the troops of riders, and three captains
gallop up and down; following each in equal command rides a glittering
division of twelve boys. One youthful line goes rejoicingly behind
little Priam, renewer of his grandsire's name, thy renowned seed, O
Polites, and destined to people Italy; he rides a Thracian horse dappled
with spots of white, showing white on his pacing pasterns and white on
his high forehead. Second is Atys, from whom the Latin Atii draw their
line, little Atys, boy beloved of the boy Iülus. Last and excellent in
beauty before them all, Iülus rode in on a Sidonian horse that Dido the
bright had given him for token and pledge of love. The rest of them are
mounted on old Acestes' Sicilian horses. . . . The Dardanians greet their
shy entrance with applause, and rejoice at the view, and recognise the
features of their parents of old. When they have ridden merrily round
all the concourse of their gazing friends, Epytides shouts from afar the
signal they await, and sounds his whip. They gallop apart in equal
numbers, and open their files three and three in deploying bands, and
again at the call wheel about and bear down with levelled arms. Next
they start on other charges and other retreats in corresponsive spaces,
and interlink circle with circle, and wage the armed phantom of battle.
And now they bare their backs in flight, now turn their lances to the
charge, now plight peace and ride on side by side. As once of old, they
say, the labyrinth in high Crete had a tangled path between blind walls,
and a thousand ways of doubling treachery, where tokens to follow failed
in the [591-625] maze unmastered and irrecoverable: even in such a track
do the children of Troy entangle their footsteps and weave the game of
flight and battle; like dolphins who, swimming through the wet seas, cut
Carpathian or Libyan. . . .



This fashion of riding, these games Ascanius first revived, when he girt
Alba the Long about with walls, and taught their celebration to the Old
Latins in the way of his own boyhood, with the youth of Troy about him.
The Albans taught it their children; on from them mighty Rome received
it and kept the ancestral observance; and now it is called Troy, and the
boys the Trojan troop.



Thus far sped the sacred contests to their holy lord. Just at this
Fortune broke faith and grew estranged. While they pay the due rites to
the tomb with diverse games, Juno, daughter of Saturn, sends Iris down
the sky to the Ilian fleet, and breathes a gale to speed her on,
revolving many a thought, and not yet satiate of the ancient pain. She,
speeding her way along the thousand-coloured bow, runs swiftly, seen of
none, down her maiden path. She discerns the vast concourse, and
traverses the shore, and sees the haven abandoned and the fleet left
alone. But far withdrawn by the solitary verge of the sea the Trojan
women wept their lost Anchises, and as they wept gazed all together on
the fathomless flood. 'Alas! after all those weary waterways, that so
wide a sea is yet to come!' such is the single cry of all. They pray for
a city, sick of the burden of their sea-sorrow. So she darts among them,
not witless to harm, and lays by face and raiment of a goddess: she
becomes Beroë, the aged wife of Tmarian Doryclus, who had once had birth
and name and children, and in this guise goes among the Dardanian
matrons. 'Ah, wretched we,' she cries, 'whom hostile Achaean hands did
not drag to death beneath our native city! ah hapless race, for what
destruction does Fortune hold thee back? The [626-660] seventh summer
now declines since Troy's overthrow, while we pass measuring out by so
many stars the harbourless rocks over every water and land, pursuing all
the while over the vast sea an Italy that flies us, and tossing on the
waves. Here are our brother Eryx' borders, and Acestes' welcome: who
denies us to cast up walls and give our citizens a city? O country, O
household gods vainly rescued from the foe! shall there never be a
Trojan town to tell of? shall I nowhere see a Xanthus and a Simoïs, the
rivers of Hector? Nay, up and join me in burning with fire these
ill-ominous ships. For in sleep the phantom of Cassandra the soothsayer
seemed to give me blazing brands: Here seek your Troy , she said; here
is your home . Now is the time to do it; nor do these high portents
allow delay. Behold four altars to Neptune; the god himself lends the
firebrand and the nerve.' Speaking thus, at once she strongly seizes the
fiery weapon, and with straining hand whirls it far upreared, and
flings: the souls of the Ilian women are startled and their wits amazed.
At this one of their multitude, and she the eldest, Pyrgo, nurse in the
palace to all Priam's many children: 'This is not Beroë, I tell you, O
mothers; this is not the wife of Doryclus of Rhoeteum. Mark the
lineaments of divine grace and the gleaming eyes, what a breath is hers,
what a countenance, and the sound of her voice and the steps of her
going. I, I time agone left Beroë apart, sick and fretting that she
alone must have no part in this our service, nor pay Anchises his due
sacrifice.' So spoke she. . . . But the matrons at first, dubious and
wavering, gazed on the ships with malignant eyes, between the wretched
longing for the land they trod and the fated realm that summoned them:
when the goddess rose through the sky on poised wings, and in her flight
drew a vast bow beneath the clouds. Then indeed, amazed at the tokens
and driven by madness, they raise a cry and snatch fire from the
[661-694] hearths within; others plunder the altars, and cast on
brushwood boughs and brands. The Fire-god rages with loose rein over
thwarts and oars and hulls of painted fir. Eumelus carries the news of
the burning ships to the grave of Anchises and the ranges of the
theatre; and looking back, their own eyes see the floating cloud of dark
ashes. And in a moment Ascanius, as he rode gaily before his cavalry,
spurred his horse to the disordered camp; nor can his breathless
guardians hold him back. 'What strange madness is this?' he cries;
'whither now hasten you, whither, alas and woe! O citizens? not on the
foe nor on some hostile Argive camp; it is your own hopes you burn.
Behold me, your Ascanius!' and he flung before his feet the empty
helmet, put on when he roused the mimicry of war. Aeneas and the Trojan
train together hurry to the spot. But the women scatter apart in fear
all over the beach, and stealthily seek the woods and the hollow rocks
they find: they loathe their deed and the daylight, and with changed
eyes know their people, and Juno is startled out of their breast. But
not thereby do the flames of the burning lay down their unconquered
strength; under the wet oak the seams are alive, spouting slow coils of
smoke; the creeping heat devours the hulls, and the destroyer takes deep
hold of all: nor does the heroes' strength avail nor the floods they
pour in. Then good Aeneas rent away the raiment from his shoulders and
called the gods to aid, stretching forth his hands: 'Jupiter omnipotent,
if thou hatest not Troy yet wholly to her last man, if thine ancient
pity looks at all on human woes, now, O Lord, grant our fleet to escape
the flame, and rescue from doom the slender Teucrian estate. Or do thou
plunge to death this remnant, if I deserve it, with levelled
thunderbolt, and here with thine own hand smite us down.' Scarce had he
uttered this, when a black tempest rages in streaming showers; earth
trembles [695-726] to the thunder on plain and steep; the water-flood
rushes in torrents from the whole heaven amid black darkness and
volleying blasts of the South. The ships are filled from overhead, the
half-burnt timbers are soaking; till all the heat is quenched, and all
the hulls, but four that are lost, are rescued from destruction.



But lord Aeneas, dismayed by the bitter mischance, revolved at heart
this way and that his shifting weight of care, whether, forgetting fate,
he should rest in Sicilian fields, or reach forth to the borders of
Italy. Then old Nautes, whom Tritonian Pallas taught like none other,
and made famous in eminence of art—she granted him to reply what the
gods' heavy anger menaced or what the order of fate claimed—he then in
accents of comfort thus speaks to Aeneas:



'Goddess-born, follow we fate's ebb and flow, whatsoever it shall be;
fortune must be borne to be overcome. Acestes is of thine own divine
Dardanian race; take him, for he is willing, to join thee in common
counsel; deliver to him those who are over, now these ships are lost,
and those who are quite weary of thy fortunes and the great quest.
Choose out the old men stricken in years, and the matrons sick of the
sea, and all that is weak and fearful of peril in thy company. Let this
land give a city to the weary; they shall be allowed to call their town
Acesta by name.'



Then, indeed, kindled by these words of his aged friend, his spirit is
distracted among all his cares. And now black Night rose chariot-borne,
and held the sky; when the likeness of his father Anchises seemed to
descend from heaven and suddenly utter thus:



'O son, more dear to me than life once of old while life was yet mine; O
son, hard wrought by the destinies of Ilium! I come hither by Jove's
command, who drove the [727-760] fire from thy fleets, and at last had
pity out of high heaven. Obey thou the fair counsel aged Nautes now
gives. Carry through to Italy thy chosen men and bravest souls; in
Latium must thou war down a people hard and rough in living. Yet ere
then draw thou nigh the nether chambers of Dis, and in the deep tract of
hell come, O son, to meet me. For I am not held in cruel Tartarus among
wailing ghosts, but inhabit Elysium and the sweet societies of the good.
Hither with much blood of dark cattle shall the holy Sibyl lead thee.
Then shalt thou learn of all thy line, and what city is given thee. And
now farewell; dank Night wheels her mid-career, and even now I feel the
stern breath of the panting horses of the East.' He ended, and retreated
like a vapour into thin air. 'Ah, whither hurriest thou?' cries Aeneas;
'whither so fast away? From whom fliest thou? or who withholds thee from
our embrace?' So speaking, he kindles the sleeping embers of the fire,
and with holy meal and laden censer does sacrifice to the tutelar of
Pergama and hoar Vesta's secret shrine.



Straightway he summons his crews and Acestes first of all, and instructs
them of Jove's command and his beloved father's precepts, and what is
now his fixed mind and purpose. They linger not in counsel, nor does
Acestes decline his bidden duty: they enrol the matrons in their town,
and plant a people there, souls that will have none of glory. The rest
repair the thwarts and replace the ships' timbers that the flames had
gnawed upon, and fit up oars and rigging, little in number, but alive
and valiant for war. Meanwhile Aeneas traces the town with the plough
and allots the homesteads; this he bids be Ilium, and these lands Troy.
Trojan Acestes, rejoicing in his kingdom, appoints a court and gathers
his senators to give them statutes. Next, where the crest of Eryx is
neighbour to the stars, a dwelling is founded to Venus the Idalian;
[761-793] and a priest and breadth of holy wood is attached to Anchises'
grave.



And now for nine days all the people hath feasted, and offering been
paid at the altars; quiet breezes have smoothed the ocean floor, and the
gathering south wind blows, calling them again to sea. A mighty weeping
arises along the winding shore; a night and a day they linger in mutual
embraces. The very mothers now, the very men to whom once the sight of
the sea seemed cruel and the name intolerable, would go on and endure
the journey's travail to the end. These Aeneas comforts with kindly
words, and commends with tears to his kinsman Acestes' care. Then he
bids slay three steers to Eryx and a she-lamb to the Tempests, and loose
the hawser as is due. Himself, his head bound with stripped leaves of
olive, he stands apart on the prow holding the cup, and casts the
entrails into the salt flood and pours liquid wine. A wind rising astern
follows them forth on their way. Emulously the crews strike the water,
and sweep through the seas.



But Venus meanwhile, wrought upon with distress, accosts Neptune, and
thus pours forth her heart's complaint: 'Juno's bitter wrath and heart
insatiable compel me, O Neptune, to sink to the uttermost of entreaty:
neither length of days nor any goodness softens her, nor doth Jove's
command and fate itself break her to desistence. It is not enough that
her accursed hatred hath devoured the Phrygian city from among the
people, and exhausted on it the stores of vengeance; still she pursues
this remnant, the bones and ashes of murdered Troy. I pray she know why
her passion is so fierce. Thyself art my witness what a sudden stir she
raised of late on the Libyan waters, flinging all the seas to heaven in
vain reliance on Aeolus' blasts; this she dared in thy realm. . . . Lo too,
driving the Trojan matrons into guilt, she hath foully [794-826] burned
their ships, and forced them, their fleet lost, to leave the crews to an
unknown land. Let the remnant, I beseech thee, give their sails to thy
safe keeping across the seas; let them reach Laurentine Tiber; if I ask
what is permitted, if fate grants them a city there.'



Then the son of Saturn, compeller of the ocean deep, uttered thus: 'It
is wholly right, O Cytherean, that thy trust should be in my realm,
whence thou drawest birth; and I have deserved it: often have I allayed
the rage and full fury of sky and sea. Nor less on land, I call Xanthus
and Simoïs to witness, hath been my care of thine Aeneas. When Achilles
pursued the Trojan armies and hurled them breathless on their walls, and
sent many thousands to death,—when the choked rivers groaned and
Xanthus could not find passage or roll out to sea,—then I snatched
Aeneas away in sheltering mist as he met the brave son of Peleus
outmatched in strength and gods, eager as I was to overthrow the walls
of perjured Troy that mine own hands had built. Now too my mind rests
the same; dismiss thy fear. In safety, as thou desirest, shall he reach
the haven of Avernus. One will there be alone whom on the flood thou
shalt lose and require; one life shall be given for many. . . .'



With these words the goddess' bosom is soothed to joy. Then their lord
yokes his wild horses with gold and fastens the foaming bits, and
letting all the reins run slack in his hand, flies lightly in his
sea-coloured chariot over the ocean surface. The waves sink to rest, and
the swoln water-ways smooth out under the thundering axle; the
storm-clouds scatter from the vast sky. Diverse shapes attend him,
monstrous whales, and Glaucus' aged choir, and Palaemon, son of Ino, the
swift Tritons, and Phorcus with all his army. Thetis and Melite keep the
left, and maiden Panopea, Nesaea and Spio, Thalia and Cymodoce.




[827-860] At this lord Aeneas' soul is thrilled with soft counterchange
of delight. He bids all the masts be upreared with speed, and the sails
stretched on the yards. Together all set their sheets, and all at once
slacken their canvas to left and again to right; together they brace and
unbrace the yard-arms aloft; prosperous gales waft the fleet along.
First, in front of all, Palinurus steered the close column; the rest
under orders ply their course by his. And now dewy Night had just
reached heaven's mid-cone; the sailors, stretched on their hard benches
under the oars, relaxed their limbs in quiet rest: when Sleep, sliding
lightly down from the starry sky, parted the shadowy air and cleft the
dark, seeking thee, O Palinurus, carrying dreams of bale to thee who
dreamt not of harm, and lit on the high stern, a god in Phorbas'
likeness, dropping this speech from his lips: 'Palinurus son of Iasus,
the very seas bear our fleet along; the breezes breathe steadily; for an
hour rest is given. Lay down thine head, and steal thy worn eyes from
their toil. I myself for a little will take thy duty in thy stead.' To
whom Palinurus, scarcely lifting his eyes, returns: 'Wouldst thou have
me ignorant what the calm face of the brine means, and the waves at
rest? Shall I have faith in this perilous thing? How shall I trust
Aeneas to deceitful breezes, and the placid treachery of sky that hath
so often deceived me?' Such words he uttered, and, clinging fast to the
tiller, slackened hold no whit, and looked up steadily on the stars. Lo!
the god shakes over either temple a bough dripping with Lethean dew and
made slumberous with the might of Styx, and makes his swimming eyes
relax their struggles. Scarcely had sleep begun to slacken his limbs
unaware, when bending down, he flung him sheer into the clear water,
tearing rudder and half the stern away with him, and many a time crying
vainly on his comrades: himself [861-871] he rose on flying wings into
the thin air. None the less does the fleet run safe on its sea path, and
glides on unalarmed in lord Neptune's assurance. Yes, and now they were
sailing in to the cliffs of the Sirens, dangerous once of old and white
with the bones of many a man; and the hoarse rocks echoed afar in the
ceaseless surf; when her lord felt the ship rocking astray for loss of
her helmsman, and himself steered her on over the darkling water,
sighing often the while, and heavy at heart for his friend's mischance.
'Ah too trustful in sky's and sea's serenity, thou shalt lie, O
Palinurus, naked on an alien sand!'

=== AENEID BOOK 6 ===

THE VISION OF THE UNDER WORLD 


So speaks he weeping, and gives his fleet the rein, and at last glides
in to Euboïc Cumae's coast. They turn the prows seaward; the ships
grounded fast on their anchors' teeth, and the curving ships line the
beach. The warrior band leaps forth eagerly on the Hesperian shore; some
seek the seeds of flame hidden in veins of flint, some scour the woods,
the thick coverts of wild beasts, and find and shew the streams. But
good Aeneas seeks the fortress where Apollo sits high enthroned, and the
lone mystery of the awful Sibyl's cavern depth, over whose mind and soul
the prophetic Delian breathes high inspiration and reveals futurity.



Now they draw nigh the groves of Trivia and the roof of gold. Daedalus,
as the story runs, when in flight from Minos' realm he dared to spread
his fleet wings to the sky, glided on his unwonted way towards the icy
northern star, and at length lit gently on the Chalcidian fastness.
Here, on the first land he retrod, he dedicated his winged oarage to
thee, O Phoebus, in the vast temple he built. On the doors is Androgeus'
death; thereby the children of Cecrops, bidden, ah me! to pay for yearly
ransom seven souls of their sons; the urn stands there, and the lots are
drawn. Right [23-55] opposite the land of Gnosus rises from the sea; on
it is the cruel love of the bull, the disguised stealth of Pasiphaë, and
the mingled breed and double issue of the Minotaur, record of a shameful
passion; on it the famous dwelling's laborious inextricable maze; but
Daedalus, pitying the great love of the princess, himself unlocked the
tangled treachery of the palace, guiding with the clue her lover's blind
footsteps. Thou too hadst no slight part in the work he wrought, O
Icarus, did grief allow. Twice had he essayed to portray thy fate in
gold; twice the father's hands dropped down. Nay, their eyes would scan
all the story in order, were not Achates already returned from his
errand, and with him the priestess of Phoebus and Trivia, Deïphobe
daughter of Glaucus, who thus accosts the king: 'Other than this are the
sights the time demands: now were it well to sacrifice seven unbroken
bullocks of the herd, as many fitly chosen sheep of two years old.' Thus
speaks she to Aeneas; nor do they delay to do her sacred bidding; and
the priestess calls the Teucrians into the lofty shrine.



A vast cavern is scooped in the side of the Euboïc cliff, whither lead
an hundred wide passages by an hundred gates, whence peal forth as
manifold the responses of the Sibyl. They had reached the threshold,
when the maiden cries: It is time to enquire thy fate: the god, lo! the
god! And even as she spoke thus in the gateway, suddenly countenance
nor colour nor ranged tresses stayed the same; her wild heart heaves
madly in her panting bosom; and she expands to sight, and her voice is
more than mortal, now the god breathes on her in nearer deity.
'Lingerest thou to vow and pray,' she cries, 'Aeneas of Troy? lingerest
thou? for not till then will the vast portals of the spellbound house
swing open.' So spoke she, and sank to silence. A cold shiver ran
through the Teucrians' iron frames, and the king pours heart-deep
supplication:




[56-89] 'Phoebus, who hast ever pitied the sore travail of Troy, who
didst guide the Dardanian shaft from Paris' hand full on the son of
Aeacus, in thy leading have I pierced all these seas that skirt mighty
lands, the Massylian nations far withdrawn, and the fields the Syrtes
fringe; thus far let the fortune of Troy follow us. You too may now
unforbidden spare the nation of Pergama, gods and goddesses to
whomsoever Ilium and the great glory of Dardania did wrong. And thou, O
prophetess most holy, foreknower of the future, grant (for no unearned
realm does my destiny claim) a resting-place in Latium to the Teucrians,
to their wandering gods and the storm-tossed deities of Troy. Then will
I ordain to Phoebus and Trivia a temple of solid marble, and festal days
in Phoebus' name. Thee likewise a mighty sanctuary awaits in our realm.
For here will I place thine oracles and the secrets of destiny uttered
to my people, and consecrate chosen men, O gracious one. Only commit not
thou thy verses to leaves, lest they fly disordered, the sport of
rushing winds; thyself utter them, I beseech thee.' His lips made an end
of utterance.



But the prophetess, not yet tame to Phoebus' hand, rages fiercely in the
cavern, so she may shake the mighty godhead from her breast; so much the
more does he tire her maddened mouth and subdue her wild breast and
shape her to his pressure. And now the hundred mighty portals of the
house open of their own accord, and bring through the air the answer of
the soothsayer:



'O past at length with the great perils of the sea! though heavier yet
by land await thee, the Dardanians shall come to the realm of Lavinium;
relieve thy heart of this care; but not so shall they have joy of their
coming. Wars, grim wars I discern, and Tiber afoam with streams of
blood. A Simoïs shall not fail thee, a Xanthus, a Dorian camp; another
Achilles is already found for Latium, he too [90-123] goddess-born; nor
shall Juno's presence ever leave the Teucrians; while thou in thy need,
to what nations or what towns of Italy shalt thou not sue! Again is an
alien bride the source of all that Teucrian woe, again a foreign
marriage-chamber. . . . Yield not thou to distresses, but all the bolder go
forth to meet them, as thy fortune shall allow thee way. The path of
rescue, little as thou deemest it, shall first open from a Grecian
town.'



In such words the Sibyl of Cumae chants from the shrine her perplexing
terrors, echoing through the cavern truth wrapped in obscurity: so does
Apollo clash the reins and ply the goad in her maddened breast. So soon
as the spasm ceased and the raving lips sank to silence, Aeneas the hero
begins: 'No shape of toil, O maiden, rises strange or sudden on my
sight; all this ere now have I guessed and inly rehearsed in spirit. One
thing I pray; since here is the gate named of the infernal king, and the
darkling marsh of Acheron's overflow, be it given me to go to my beloved
father, to see him face to face; teach thou the way, and open the
consecrated portals. Him on these shoulders I rescued from encircling
flames and a thousand pursuing weapons, and brought him safe from amid
the enemy; he accompanied my way over all the seas, and bore with me all
the threats of ocean and sky, in weakness, beyond his age's strength and
due. Nay, he it was who besought and enjoined me to seek thy grace and
draw nigh thy courts. Have pity, I beseech thee, on son and father, O
gracious one! for thou art all-powerful, nor in vain hath Hecate given
thee rule in the groves of Avernus. If Orpheus could call up his wife's
ghost in the strength of his Thracian lyre and the music of the
strings,—if Pollux redeemed his brother by exchange of death, and
passes and repasses so often,—why make mention of great Theseus, why of
Alcides? I too am of Jove's sovereign race.'




[124-157] In such words he pleaded and clasped the altars; when the
soothsayer thus began to speak:



'O sprung of gods' blood, child of Anchises of Troy, easy is the descent
into hell; all night and day the gate of dark Dis stands open; but to
recall thy steps and issue to upper air, this is the task and burden.
Some few of gods' lineage have availed, such as Jupiter's gracious
favour or virtue's ardour hath upborne to heaven. Midway all is muffled
in forest, and the black coils of Cocytus circle it round. Yet if thy
soul is so passionate and so desirous twice to float across the Stygian
lake, twice to see dark Tartarus, and thy pleasure is to plunge into the
mad task, learn what must first be accomplished. Hidden in a shady tree
is a bough with leafage and pliant shoot all of gold, consecrate to
nether Juno, wrapped in the depth of woodland and shut in by dim dusky
vales. But to him only who first hath plucked the golden-tressed
fruitage from the tree is it given to enter the hidden places of the
earth. This hath beautiful Proserpine ordained to be borne to her for
her proper gift. The first torn away, a second fills the place in gold,
and the spray burgeons with even such ore again. So let thine eyes trace
it home, and thine hand pluck it duly when found; for lightly and
unreluctant will it follow if thine is fate's summons; else will no
strength of thine avail to conquer it nor hard steel to cut it away. Yet
again, a friend of thine lies a lifeless corpse, alas! thou knowest it
not, and defiles all the fleet with death, while thou seekest our
counsel and lingerest in our courts. First lay him in his resting-place
and hide him in the tomb; lead thither black cattle; be this first thine
expiation; so at last shalt thou behold the Stygian groves and the realm
untrodden of the living.' She spoke, and her lips shut to silence.



Aeneas goes forth, and leaves the cavern with fixed eyes and sad
countenance, his soul revolving inly the unseen [158-194] issues. By his
side goes faithful Achates, and plants his footsteps in equal
perplexity. Long they ran on in mutual change of talk; of what lifeless
comrade spoke the soothsayer, of what body for burial? And even as they
came, they see on the dry beach Misenus cut off by untimely death,
Misenus the Aeolid, excelled of none other in stirring men with brazen
breath and kindling battle with his trumpet-note. He had been attendant
on mighty Hector; in Hector's train he waged battle, renowned alike for
bugle and spear: after victorious Achilles robbed him of life the
valiant hero had joined Dardanian Aeneas' company, and followed no
meaner leader. But now, while he makes his hollow shell echo over the
seas, ah fool! and calls the gods to rival his blast, jealous Triton, if
belief is due, had caught him among the rocks and sunk him in the
foaming waves. So all surrounded him with loud murmur and cries, good
Aeneas the foremost. Then weeping they quickly hasten on the Sibyl's
orders, and work hard to pile trees for the altar of burial, and heap it
up into the sky. They move into the ancient forest, the deep coverts of
game; pitch-pines fall flat, ilex rings to the stroke of axes, and ashen
beams and oak are split in clefts with wedges; they roll in huge
mountain-ashes from the hills. Aeneas likewise is first in the work, and
cheers on his crew and arms himself with their weapons. And alone with
his sad heart he ponders it all, gazing on the endless forest, and
utters this prayer: 'If but now that bough of gold would shew itself to
us on the tree in this depth of woodland! since all the soothsayer's
tale of thee, Misenus, was, alas! too truly spoken.' Scarcely had he
said thus, when twin doves haply came flying down the sky, and lit on
the green sod right under his eyes. Then the kingly hero knows them for
his mother's birds, and joyfully prays: 'Ah, be my guides, if way there
be, and direct your aëry passage into the groves [195-230] where the
rich bough overshadows the fertile ground! and thou, O goddess mother,
fail not our wavering fortune.' So spoke he and stayed his steps,
marking what they signify, whither they urge their way. Feeding and
flying they advance at such distance as following eyes could keep them
in view; then, when they came to Avernus' pestilent gorge, they tower
swiftly, and sliding down through the liquid air, choose their seat and
light side by side on a tree, through whose boughs shone out the
contrasting flicker of gold. As in chill mid-winter the woodland is wont
to blossom with the strange leafage of the mistletoe, sown on an alien
tree and wreathing the smooth stems with burgeoning saffron; so on the
shadowy ilex seemed that leafy gold, so the foil tinkled in the light
breeze. Immediately Aeneas seizes it and eagerly breaks off its
resistance, and carries it beneath the Sibyl's roof.



And therewithal the Teucrians on the beach wept Misenus, and bore the
last rites to the thankless ashes. First they build up a vast pyre of
resinous billets and sawn oak, whose sides they entwine with dark leaves
and plant funereal cypresses in front, and adorn it above with his
shining armour. Some prepare warm water in cauldrons bubbling over the
flames, and wash and anoint the chill body, and make their moan; then,
their weeping done, lay his limbs on the pillow, and spread over it
crimson raiment, the accustomed pall. Some uplift the heavy bier, a
melancholy service, and with averted faces in their ancestral fashion
hold and thrust in the torch. Gifts of frankincense, food, and bowls of
olive oil, are poured and piled upon the fire. After the embers sank in
and the flame died away, they soaked with wine the remnant of thirsty
ashes, and Corynaeus gathered the bones and shut them in an urn of
brass; and he too thrice encircled his comrades with fresh water, and
cleansed them with light spray sprinkled from a [231-267] bough of
fruitful olive, and spoke the last words of all. But good Aeneas heaps a
mighty mounded tomb over him, with his own armour and his oar and
trumpet, beneath a skyey mountain that now is called Misenus after him,
and keeps his name immortal from age to age.



This done, he hastens to fulfil the Sibyl's ordinance. A deep cave
yawned dreary and vast, shingle-strewn, sheltered by the black lake and
the gloom of the forests; over it no flying things could wing their way
unharmed, such a vapour streamed from the dark gorge and rose into the
overarching sky. Here the priestess first arrays four black-bodied
bullocks and pours wine upon their forehead; and plucking the topmost
hairs from between the horns, lays them on the sacred fire for
first-offering, calling aloud on Hecate, mistress of heaven and hell.
Others lay knives beneath, and catch the warm blood in cups. Aeneas
himself smites with the sword a black-fleeced she-lamb to the mother of
the Eumenides and her mighty sister, and a barren heifer, Proserpine, to
thee. Then he uprears darkling altars to the Stygian king, and lays
whole carcases of bulls upon the flames, pouring fat oil over the
blazing entrails. And lo! about the first rays of sunrise the ground
moaned underfoot, and the woodland ridges began to stir, and dogs seemed
to howl through the dusk as the goddess came. 'Apart, ah keep apart, O
ye unsanctified!' cries the soothsayer; 'retire from all the grove; and
thou, stride on and unsheath thy steel; now is need of courage, O
Aeneas, now of strong resolve.' So much she spoke, and plunged madly
into the cavern's opening; he with unflinching steps keeps pace with his
advancing guide.



Gods who are sovereign over souls! silent ghosts, and Chaos and
Phlegethon, the wide dumb realm of night! as I have heard, so let me
tell, and according to your will unfold things sunken deep under earth
in gloom.




[268-303] They went darkling through the dusk beneath the solitary
night, through the empty dwellings and bodiless realm of Dis; even as
one walks in the forest beneath the jealous light of a doubtful moon,
when Jupiter shrouds the sky in shadow and black night blots out the
world. Right in front of the doorway and in the entry of the jaws of
hell Grief and avenging Cares have made their bed; there dwell wan
Sicknesses and gloomy Eld, and Fear, and ill-counselling Hunger, and
loathly Want, shapes terrible to see; and Death and Travail, and thereby
Sleep, Death's kinsman, and the Soul's guilty Joys, and death-dealing
War full in the gateway, and the Furies in their iron cells, and mad
Discord with bloodstained fillets enwreathing her serpent locks.



Midway an elm, shadowy and high, spreads her boughs and secular arms,
where, one saith, idle Dreams dwell clustering, and cling under every
leaf. And monstrous creatures besides, many and diverse, keep covert at
the gates, Centaurs and twy-shaped Scyllas, and the hundredfold
Briareus, and the beast of Lerna hissing horribly, and the Chimaera
armed with flame, Gorgons and Harpies, and the body of the triform
shade. Here Aeneas snatches at his sword in a sudden flutter of terror,
and turns the naked edge on them as they come; and did not his wise
fellow-passenger remind him that these lives flit thin and unessential
in the hollow mask of body, he would rush on and vainly lash through
phantoms with his steel.



Hence a road leads to Tartarus and Acheron's wave. Here the dreary pool
swirls thick in muddy eddies and disgorges into Cocytus with its load of
sand. Charon, the dread ferryman, guards these flowing streams, ragged
and awful, his chin covered with untrimmed masses of hoary hair, and his
glassy eyes aflame; his soiled raiment hangs knotted from his shoulders.
Himself he plies the pole and trims the sails of his vessel, the
steel-blue galley with freight [304-336] of dead; stricken now in years,
but a god's old age is lusty and green. Hither all crowded, and rushed
streaming to the bank, matrons and men and high-hearted heroes dead and
done with life, boys and unwedded girls, and children laid young on the
bier before their parents' eyes, multitudinous as leaves fall dropping
in the forests at autumn's earliest frost, or birds swarm landward from
the deep gulf, when the chill of the year routs them overseas and drives
them to sunny lands. They stood pleading for the first passage across,
and stretched forth passionate hands to the farther shore. But the grim
sailor admits now one and now another, while some he pushes back far
apart on the strand. Moved with marvel at the confused throng: 'Say, O
maiden,' cries Aeneas, 'what means this flocking to the river? of what
are the souls so fain? or what difference makes these retire from the
banks, those go with sweeping oars over the leaden waterways?'



To him the long-lived priestess thus briefly returned: 'Seed of
Anchises, most sure progeny of gods, thou seest the deep pools of
Cocytus and the Stygian marsh, by whose divinity the gods fear to swear
falsely. All this crowd thou discernest is helpless and unsepultured;
Charon is the ferryman; they who ride on the wave found a tomb. Nor is
it given to cross the awful banks and hoarse streams ere the dust hath
found a resting-place. An hundred years they wander here flitting about
the shore; then at last they gain entrance, and revisit the pools so
sorely desired.'



Anchises' son stood still, and ponderingly stayed his footsteps, pitying
at heart their cruel lot. There he discerns, mournful and unhonoured
dead, Leucaspis and Orontes, captains of the Lycian squadron, whom, as
they sailed together from Troy over gusty seas, the south wind
overwhelmed and wrapped the waters round ship and men.




[337-369] Lo, there went by Palinurus the steersman, who of late, while
he watched the stars on their Libyan passage, had slipped from the stern
and fallen amid the waves. To him, when he first knew the melancholy
form in that depth of shade, he thus opens speech: 'What god, O
Palinurus, reft thee from us and sank thee amid the seas? forth and
tell. For in this single answer Apollo deceived me, never found false
before, when he prophesied thee safety on ocean and arrival on the
Ausonian coasts. See, is this his promise-keeping?'



And he: 'Neither did Phoebus on his oracular seat delude thee, O prince,
Anchises' son, nor did any god drown me in the sea. For while I clung to
my appointed charge and governed our course, I pulled the tiller with me
in my fall, and the shock as I slipped wrenched it away. By the rough
seas I swear, fear for myself never wrung me so sore as for thy ship,
lest, the rudder lost and the pilot struck away, those gathering waves
might master it. Three wintry nights in the water the blustering south
drove me over the endless sea; scarcely on the fourth dawn I descried
Italy as I rose on the climbing wave. Little by little I swam shoreward;
already I clung safe; but while, encumbered with my dripping raiment, I
caught with crooked fingers at the jagged needles of mountain rock, the
barbarous people attacked me in arms and ignorantly deemed me a prize.
Now the wave holds me, and the winds toss me on the shore. By heaven's
pleasant light and breezes I beseech thee, by thy father, by Iülus thy
rising hope, rescue me from these distresses, O unconquered one! Either
do thou, for thou canst, cast earth over me and again seek the haven of
Velia; or do thou, if in any wise that may be, if in any wise the
goddess who bore thee shews a way,—for not without divine will do I
deem thou wilt float across these vast rivers and the Stygian
pool,—lend me a pitying [370-403] hand, and bear me over the waves in
thy company, that at least in death I may find a quiet resting-place.'



Thus he ended, and the soothsayer thus began: 'Whence, O Palinurus, this
fierce longing of thine? Shalt thou without burial behold the Stygian
waters and the awful river of the Furies? Cease to hope prayers may bend
the decrees of heaven. But take my words to thy memory, for comfort in
thy woeful case: far and wide shall the bordering cities be driven by
celestial portents to appease thy dust; they shall rear a tomb, and pay
the tomb a yearly offering, and for evermore shall the place keep
Palinurus' name.' The words soothed away his distress, and for a while
drove grief away from his sorrowing heart; he is glad in the land of his
name.



So they complete their journey's beginning, and draw nigh the river.
Just then the waterman descried them from the Stygian wave advancing
through the silent woodland and turning their feet towards the bank, and
opens on them in these words of challenge: 'Whoso thou art who marchest
in arms towards our river, forth and say, there as thou art, why thou
comest, and stay thine advance. This is the land of Shadows, of Sleep,
and slumberous Night; no living body may the Stygian hull convey. Nor
truly had I joy of taking Alcides on the lake for passenger, nor Theseus
and Pirithoüs, born of gods though they were and unconquered in might.
He laid fettering hand on the warder of Tartarus, and dragged him
cowering from the throne of my lord the King; they essayed to ravish our
mistress from the bridal chamber of Dis.' Thereto the Amphrysian
soothsayer made brief reply: 'No such plot is here; be not moved; nor do
our weapons offer violence; the huge gatekeeper may bark on for ever in
his cavern and affright the bloodless ghosts; Proserpine may keep her
honour within her uncle's gates. Aeneas of Troy, renowned [404-437] in
goodness as in arms, goes down to meet his father in the deep shades of
Erebus. If the sight of such affection stirs thee in nowise, yet this
bough' (she discovers the bough hidden in her raiment) 'thou must know.'
Then his heaving breast allays its anger, and he says no more; but
marvelling at the awful gift, the fated rod so long unseen, he steers in
his dusky vessel and draws to shore. Next he routs out the souls that
sate on the long benches, and clears the thwarts, while he takes mighty
Aeneas on board. The galley groaned under the weight in all her seams,
and the marsh-water leaked fast in. At length prophetess and prince are
landed unscathed on the ugly ooze and livid sedge.



This realm rings with the triple-throated baying of vast Cerberus,
couched huge in the cavern opposite; to whom the prophetess, seeing the
serpents already bristling up on his neck, throws a cake made slumberous
with honey and drugged grain. He, with threefold jaws gaping in ravenous
hunger, catches it when thrown, and sinks to earth with monstrous body
outstretched, and sprawling huge over all his den. The warder
overwhelmed, Aeneas makes entrance, and quickly issues from the bank of
the irremeable wave.



Immediately wailing voices are loud in their ears, the souls of babies
crying on the doorway sill, whom, torn from the breast and portionless
in life's sweetness, a dark day cut off and drowned in bitter death.
Hard by them are those condemned to death on false accusation. Neither
indeed are these dwellings assigned without lot and judgment; Minos
presides and shakes the urn; he summons a council of the silent people,
and inquires of their lives and charges. Next in order have these
mourners their place whose own innocent hands dealt them death, who
flung away their souls in hatred of the day. How fain were they now in
upper air to endure their poverty and [438-472] sore travail! It may not
be; the unlovely pool locks them in her gloomy wave, and Styx pours her
ninefold barrier between. And not far from here are shewn stretching on
every side the Wailing Fields; so they call them by name. Here they whom
pitiless love hath wasted in cruel decay hide among untrodden ways,
shrouded in embosoming myrtle thickets; not death itself ends their
distresses. In this region he discerns Phaedra and Procris and woeful
Eriphyle, shewing on her the wounds of her merciless son, and Evadne and
Pasiphaë; Laodamia goes in their company, and she who was once Caeneus
and a man, now woman, and again returned by fate into her shape of old.
Among whom Dido the Phoenician, fresh from her death-wound, wandered in
the vast forest; by her the Trojan hero stood, and knew the dim form
through the darkness, even as the moon at the month's beginning to him
who sees or thinks he sees her rising through the vapours; he let tears
fall, and spoke to her lovingly and sweet:



'Alas, Dido! so the news was true that reached me; thou didst perish,
and the sword sealed thy doom! Ah me, was I cause of thy death? By the
stars I swear, by the heavenly powers and all that is sacred beneath the
earth, unwillingly, O queen, I left thy shore. But the gods, at whose
orders now I pass through this shadowy place, this land of mouldering
overgrowth and deep night, the gods' commands drove me forth; nor could
I deem my departure would bring thee pain so great as this. Stay thy
footstep, and withdraw not from our gaze. From whom fliest thou? the
last speech of thee fate ordains me is this.'



In such words and with starting tears Aeneas soothed the burning and
fierce-eyed soul. She turned away with looks fixed fast on the ground,
stirred no more in countenance by the speech he essays than if she stood
in iron flint or Marpesian stone. At length she started, and fled
wrathfully [473-508] into the shadowy woodland, where Sychaeus, her
ancient husband, responds to her distresses and equals her affection.
Yet Aeneas, dismayed by her cruel doom, follows her far on her way with
pitying tears.



Thence he pursues his appointed path. And now they trod those utmost
fields where the renowned in war have their haunt apart. Here Tydeus
meets him; here Parthenopaeus, glorious in arms, and the pallid phantom
of Adrastus; here the Dardanians long wept on earth and fallen in the
war; sighing he discerns all their long array, Glaucus and Medon and
Thersilochus, the three children of Antenor, and Polyphoetes, Ceres'
priest, and Idaeus yet charioted, yet grasping his arms. The souls
throng round him to right and left; nor is one look enough; lingering
delighted, they pace by his side and enquire wherefore he is come. But
the princes of the Grecians and Agamemnon's armies, when they see him
glittering in arms through the gloom, hurry terror-stricken away; some
turn backward, as when of old they fled to the ships; some raise their
voice faintly, and gasp out a broken ineffectual cry.



And here he saw Deïphobus son of Priam, with face cruelly torn, face and
both hands, and ears lopped from his mangled temples, and nostrils
maimed by a shameful wound. Barely he knew the cowering form that hid
its dreadful punishment; then he springs to accost it in familiar
speech:



'Deïphobus mighty in arms, seed of Teucer's royal blood, whose
wantonness of vengeance was so cruel? who was allowed to use thee thus?
Rumour reached me that on that last night, outwearied with endless
slaughter, thou hadst sunk on the heap of mingled carnage. Then mine own
hand reared an empty tomb on the Rhoetean shore, mine own voice thrice
called aloud upon thy ghost. Thy name and armour keep the spot; thee, O
my friend, I could not see nor lay in the native earth I left.'




[509-541] Whereto the son of Priam: 'In nothing, O my friend, wert thou
wanting; thou hast paid the full to Deïphobus and the dead man's shade.
But me my fate and the Laconian woman's murderous guilt thus dragged
down to doom; these are the records of her leaving. For how we spent
that last night in delusive gladness thou knowest, and must needs
remember too well. When the fated horse leapt down on the steep towers
of Troy, bearing armed infantry for the burden of its womb, she, in
feigned procession, led round our Phrygian women with Bacchic cries;
herself she upreared a mighty flame amid them, and called the Grecians
out of the fortress height. Then was I fast in mine ill-fated bridal
chamber, deep asleep and outworn with my charge, and lay overwhelmed in
slumber sweet and profound and most like to easeful death. Meanwhile
that crown of wives removes all the arms from my dwelling, and slips out
the faithful sword from beneath my head: she calls Menelaus into the
house and flings wide the gateway: be sure she hoped her lover would
magnify the gift, and so she might quench the fame of her ill deeds of
old. Why do I linger? They burst into the chamber, they and the Aeolid,
counsellor of crime, in their company. Gods, recompense the Greeks even
thus, if with righteous lips I call for vengeance! But come, tell in
turn what hap hath brought thee hither yet alive. Comest thou driven on
ocean wanderings, or by promptings from heaven? or what fortune keeps
thee from rest, that thou shouldst draw nigh these sad sunless
dwellings, this disordered land?'



In this change of talk Dawn had already crossed heaven's mid axle on her
rose-charioted way; and haply had they thus drawn out all the allotted
time; but the Sibyl made brief warning speech to her companion: 'Night
falls, Aeneas; we waste the hours in weeping. Here is the place where
the road disparts; by this that runs to the right [542-574] under great
Dis' city is our path to Elysium; but the leftward wreaks vengeance on
the wicked and sends them to unrelenting hell.' But Deïphobus: 'Be not
angered, mighty priestess; I will depart, I will refill my place and
return into darkness. Go, glory of our people, go, enjoy a fairer fate
than mine.' Thus much he spoke, and on the word turned away his
footsteps.



Aeneas looks swiftly back, and sees beneath the cliff on the left hand a
wide city, girt with a triple wall and encircled by a racing river of
boiling flame, Tartarean Phlegethon, that echoes over its rolling rocks.
In front is the gate, huge and pillared with solid adamant, that no
warring force of men nor the very habitants of heaven may avail to
overthrow; it stands up a tower of iron, and Tisiphone sitting girt in
bloodstained pall keeps sleepless watch at the entry by night and day.
Hence moans are heard and fierce lashes resound, with the clank of iron
and dragging chains. Aeneas stopped and hung dismayed at the tumult.
'What shapes of crime are here? declare, O maiden; or what the
punishment that pursues them, and all this upsurging wail?' Then the
soothsayer thus began to speak: 'Illustrious chief of Troy, no pure foot
may tread these guilty courts; but to me Hecate herself, when she gave
me rule over the groves of Avernus, taught how the gods punish, and
guided me through all her realm. Gnosian Rhadamanthus here holds
unrelaxing sway, chastises secret crime revealed, and exacts confession,
wheresoever in the upper world one vainly exultant in stolen guilt hath
till the dusk of death kept clear from the evil he wrought. Straightway
avenging Tisiphone, girt with her scourge, tramples down the shivering
sinners, menaces them with the grim snakes in her left hand, and summons
forth her sisters in merciless train. Then at last the sacred gates are
flung open and grate on the jarring hinge. Markest thou what sentry is
seated in [575-609] the doorway? what shape guards the threshold? More
grim within sits the monstrous Hydra with her fifty black yawning
throats: and Tartarus' self gapes sheer and strikes into the gloom
through twice the space that one looks upward to Olympus and the skyey
heaven. Here Earth's ancient children, the Titans' brood, hurled down by
the thunderbolt, lie wallowing in the abyss. Here likewise I saw the
twin Aloïds, enormous of frame, who essayed with violent hands to pluck
down high heaven and thrust Jove from his upper realm. Likewise I saw
Salmoneus in the cruel payment he gives for mocking Jove's flame and
Olympus' thunders. Borne by four horses and brandishing a torch, he rode
in triumph midway through the populous city of Grecian Elis, and claimed
for himself the worship of deity; madman! who would mimic the
storm-cloud and the inimitable bolt with brass that rang under his
trampling horse-hoofs. But the Lord omnipotent hurled his shaft through
thickening clouds (no firebrand his nor smoky glare of torches) and
dashed him headlong in the fury of the whirlwind. Therewithal Tityos
might be seen, fosterling of Earth the mother of all, whose body
stretches over nine full acres, and a monstrous vulture with crooked
beak eats away the imperishable liver and the entrails that breed in
suffering, and plunges deep into the breast that gives it food and
dwelling; nor is any rest given to the fibres that ever grow anew. Why
tell of the Lapithae, of Ixion and Pirithoüs? over whom a stone hangs
just slipping and just as though it fell; or the high banqueting couches
gleam golden-pillared, and the feast is spread in royal luxury before
their faces; couched hard by, the eldest of the Furies wards the tables
from their touch and rises with torch upreared and thunderous lips. Here
are they who hated their brethren while life endured, or struck a parent
or entangled a client in wrong, or who brooded [610-643] alone over
found treasure and shared it not with their fellows, this the greatest
multitude of all; and they who were slain for adultery, and who followed
unrighteous arms, and feared not to betray their masters' plighted hand.
Imprisoned they await their doom. Seek not to be told that doom, that
fashion of fortune wherein they are sunk. Some roll a vast stone, or
hang outstretched on the spokes of wheels; hapless Theseus sits and
shall sit for ever, and Phlegyas in his misery gives counsel to all and
witnesses aloud through the gloom, Learn by this warning to do justly
and not to slight the gods. This man sold his country for gold, and
laid her under a tyrant's sway; he set up and pulled down laws at a
price; this other forced his daughter's bridal chamber and a forbidden
marriage; all dared some monstrous wickedness, and had success in what
they dared. Not had I an hundred tongues, an hundred mouths, and a voice
of iron, could I sum up all the shapes of crime or name over all their
punishments.'



Thus spoke Phoebus' long-lived priestess; then 'But come now,' she
cries; 'haste on the way and perfect the service begun; let us go
faster; I descry the ramparts cast in Cyclopean furnaces, and in front
the arched gateway where they bid us lay the gifts foreordained.' She
ended, and advancing side by side along the shadowy ways, they pass over
and draw nigh the gates. Aeneas makes entrance, and sprinkling his body
with fresh water, plants the bough full in the gateway.



Now at length, this fully done, and the service of the goddess
perfected, they came to the happy place, the green pleasances and
blissful seats of the Fortunate Woodlands. Here an ampler air clothes
the meadows in lustrous sheen, and they know their own sun and a
starlight of their own. Some exercise their limbs in tournament on the
greensward, contend in games, and wrestle on the yellow sand. Some
[644-676] dance with beating footfall and lips that sing; with them is
the Thracian priest in sweeping robe, and makes music to their measures
with the notes' sevenfold interval, the notes struck now with his
fingers, now with his ivory rod. Here is Teucer's ancient brood, a
generation excellent in beauty, high-hearted heroes born in happier
years, Ilus and Assaracus, and Dardanus, founder of Troy. Afar he
marvels at the armour and chariots empty of their lords: their spears
stand fixed in the ground, and their unyoked horses pasture at large
over the plain: their life's delight in chariot and armour, their care
in pasturing their sleek horses, follows them in like wise low under
earth. Others, lo! he beholds feasting on the sward to right and left,
and singing in chorus the glad Paean-cry, within a scented laurel-grove
whence Eridanus river surges upward full-volumed through the wood. Here
is the band of them who bore wounds in fighting for their country, and
they who were pure in priesthood while life endured, and the good poets
whose speech abased not Apollo; and they who made life beautiful by the
arts of their invention, and who won by service a memory among men, the
brows of all girt with the snow-white fillet. To their encircling throng
the Sibyl spoke thus, and to Musaeus before them all; for he is midmost
of all the multitude, and stands out head and shoulders among their
upward gaze:



'Tell, O blissful souls, and thou, poet most gracious, what region, what
place hath Anchises for his own? For his sake are we come, and have
sailed across the wide rivers of Erebus.'



And to her the hero thus made brief reply: 'None hath a fixed dwelling;
we live in the shady woodlands; soft-swelling banks and meadows fresh
with streams are our habitation. But you, if this be your heart's
desire, scale this ridge, and I will even now set you on an easy
[677-708] pathway.' He spoke, and paced on before them, and from above
shews the shining plains; thereafter they leave the mountain heights.



But lord Anchises, deep in the green valley, was musing in earnest
survey over the imprisoned souls destined to the daylight above, and
haply reviewing his beloved children and all the tale of his people,
them and their fates and fortunes, their works and ways. And he, when he
saw Aeneas advancing to meet him over the greensward, stretched forth
both hands eagerly, while tears rolled over his cheeks, and his lips
parted in a cry: 'Art thou come at last, and hath thy love, O child of
my desire, conquered the difficult road? Is it granted, O my son, to
gaze on thy face and hear and answer in familiar tones? Thus indeed I
forecast in spirit, counting the days between; nor hath my care misled
me. What lands, what space of seas hast thou traversed to reach me,
through what surge of perils, O my son! How I dreaded the realm of Libya
might work thee harm!'



And he: 'Thy melancholy phantom, thine, O my father, came before me
often and often, and drove me to steer to these portals. My fleet is
anchored on the Tyrrhenian brine. Give thine hand to clasp, O my father,
give it, and withdraw not from our embrace.'



So spoke he, his face wet with abundant weeping. Thrice there did he
essay to fling his arms about his neck; thrice the phantom vainly
grasped fled out of his hands even as light wind, and most like to
fluttering sleep.



Meanwhile Aeneas sees deep withdrawn in the covert of the vale a
woodland and rustling forest thickets, and the river of Lethe that
floats past their peaceful dwellings. Around it flitted nations and
peoples innumerable; even as in the meadows when in clear summer weather
bees settle on the variegated flowers and stream round the snow-white
[709-742] lilies, all the plain is murmurous with their humming. Aeneas
starts at the sudden view, and asks the reason he knows not; what are
those spreading streams, or who are they whose vast train fills the
banks? Then lord Anchises: 'Souls, for whom second bodies are destined
and due, drink at the wave of the Lethean stream the heedless water of
long forgetfulness. These of a truth have I long desired to tell and
shew thee face to face, and number all the generation of thy children,
that so thou mayest the more rejoice with me in finding Italy.'—'O
father, must we think that any souls travel hence into upper air, and
return again to bodily fetters? why this their strange sad longing for
the light?' 'I will tell,' rejoins Anchises, 'nor will I hold thee in
suspense, my son.' And he unfolds all things in order one by one.



'First of all, heaven and earth and the liquid fields, the shining orb
of the moon and the Titanian star, doth a spirit sustain inly, and a
soul shed abroad in them sways all their members and mingles in the
mighty frame. Thence is the generation of man and beast, the life of
winged things, and the monstrous forms that ocean breeds under his
glittering floor. Those seeds have fiery force and divine birth, so far
as they are not clogged by taint of the body and dulled by earthy frames
and limbs ready to die. Hence is it they fear and desire, sorrow and
rejoice; nor can they pierce the air while barred in the blind darkness
of their prison-house. Nay, and when the last ray of life is gone, not
yet, alas! does all their woe, nor do all the plagues of the body wholly
leave them free; and needs must be that many a long ingrained evil
should take root marvellously deep. Therefore they are schooled in
punishment, and pay all the forfeit of a lifelong ill; some are hung
stretched to the viewless winds; some have the taint of guilt washed out
beneath the dreary deep, or burned away in fire. We [743-777] suffer,
each a several ghost; thereafter we are sent to the broad spaces of
Elysium, some few of us to possess the happy fields; till length of days
completing time's circle takes out the ingrained soilure and leaves
untainted the ethereal sense and pure spiritual flame. All these before
thee, when the wheel of a thousand years hath come fully round, a God
summons in vast train to the river of Lethe, that so they may regain in
forgetfulness the slopes of upper earth, and begin to desire to return
again into the body.'



Anchises ceased, and leads his son and the Sibyl likewise amid the
assembled murmurous throng, and mounts a hillock whence he might scan
all the long ranks and learn their countenances as they came.



'Now come, the glory hereafter to follow our Dardanian progeny, the
posterity to abide in our Italian people, illustrious souls and
inheritors of our name to be, these will I rehearse, and instruct thee
of thy destinies. He yonder, seest thou? the warrior leaning on his
pointless spear, holds the nearest place allotted in our groves, and
shall rise first into the air of heaven from the mingling blood of
Italy, Silvius of Alban name, the child of thine age, whom late in thy
length of days thy wife Lavinia shall nurture in the woodland, king and
father of kings; from him in Alba the Long shall our house have
dominion. He next him is Procas, glory of the Trojan race; and Capys and
Numitor; and he who shall renew thy name, Silvius Aeneas, eminent alike
in goodness or in arms, if ever he shall receive his kingdom in Alba.
Men of men! see what strength they display, and wear the civic oak
shading their brows. They shall establish Nomentum and Gabii and Fidena
city, they the Collatine hill-fortress, Pometii and the Fort of Inuus,
Bola and Cora: these shall be names that are now nameless lands. Nay,
Romulus likewise, seed of Mavors, shall join [778-810] his grandsire's
company, from his mother Ilia's nurture and Assaracus' blood. Seest thou
how the twin plumes straighten on his crest, and his father's own
emblazonment already marks him for upper air? Behold, O son! by his
augury shall Rome the renowned fill earth with her empire and heaven
with her pride, and gird about seven fortresses with her single wall,
prosperous mother of men; even as our lady of Berecyntus rides in her
chariot turret-crowned through the Phrygian cities, glad in the gods she
hath borne, clasping an hundred of her children's children, all
habitants of heaven, all dwellers on the upper heights. Hither now bend
thy twin-eyed gaze; behold this people, the Romans that are thine. Here
is Caesar and all Iülus' posterity that shall arise under the mighty
cope of heaven. Here is he, he of whose promise once and again thou
hearest, Caesar Augustus, a god's son, who shall again establish the
ages of gold in Latium over the fields that once were Saturn's realm,
and carry his empire afar to Garamant and Indian, to the land that lies
beyond our stars, beyond the sun's yearlong ways, where Atlas the
sky-bearer wheels on his shoulder the glittering star-spangled pole.
Before his coming even now the kingdoms of the Caspian shudder at
oracular answers, and the Maeotic land and the mouths of sevenfold Nile
flutter in alarm. Nor indeed did Alcides traverse such spaces of earth,
though he pierced the brazen-footed deer, or though he stilled the
Erymanthian woodlands and made Lerna tremble at his bow: nor he who
sways his team with reins of vine, Liber the conqueror, when he drives
his tigers from Nysa's lofty crest. And do we yet hesitate to give
valour scope in deeds, or shrink in fear from setting foot on Ausonian
land? Ah, and who is he apart, marked out with sprays of olive, offering
sacrifice? I know the locks and hoary chin of the king of Rome who shall
establish the infant city in his [811-843] laws, sent from little Cures'
sterile land to the majesty of empire. To him Tullus shall next succeed,
who shall break the peace of his country and stir to arms men rusted
from war and armies now disused to triumphs; and hard on him
over-vaunting Ancus follows, even now too elate in popular breath. Wilt
thou see also the Tarquin kings, and the haughty soul of Brutus the
Avenger, and the fasces regained? He shall first receive a consul's
power and the merciless axes, and when his children would stir fresh
war, the father, for fair freedom's sake, shall summon them to doom.
Unhappy! yet howsoever posterity shall take the deed, love of country
and limitless passion for honour shall prevail. Nay, behold apart the
Decii and the Drusi, Torquatus with his cruel axe, and Camillus
returning with the standards. Yonder souls likewise, whom thou
discernest gleaming in equal arms, at one now, while shut in Night, ah
me! what mutual war, what battle-lines and bloodshed shall they arouse,
so they attain the light of the living! father-in-law descending from
the Alpine barriers and the fortress of the Dweller Alone, son-in-law
facing him with the embattled East. Nay, O my children, harden not your
hearts to such warfare, neither turn upon her own heart the mastering
might of your country; and thou, be thou first to forgive, who drawest
thy descent from heaven; cast down the weapons from thy hand, O blood of
mine. . . . He shall drive his conquering chariot to the Capitoline height
triumphant over Corinth, glorious in Achaean slaughter. He shall uproot
Argos and Agamemnonian Mycenae, and the Aeacid's own heir, the seed of
Achilles mighty in arms, avenging his ancestors in Troy and Minerva's
polluted temple. Who might leave thee, lordly Cato, or thee, Cossus, to
silence? who the Gracchan family, or these two sons of the Scipios, a
double thunderbolt of war, Libya's bale? and Fabricius potent in
poverty, or [844-875] thee, Serranus, sowing in the furrow? Whither
whirl you me all breathless, O Fabii? thou art he, the most mighty, the
one man whose lingering retrieves our State. Others shall beat out the
breathing bronze to softer lines, I believe it well; shall draw living
lineaments from the marble; the cause shall be more eloquent on their
lips; their pencil shall portray the pathways of heaven, and tell the
stars in their arising: be thy charge, O Roman, to rule the nations in
thine empire; this shall be thine art, to lay down the law of peace, to
be merciful to the conquered and beat the haughty down.'



Thus lord Anchises, and as they marvel, he so pursues: 'Look how
Marcellus the conqueror marches glorious in the splendid spoils,
towering high above them all! He shall stay the Roman State, reeling
beneath the invading shock, shall ride down Carthaginian and insurgent
Gaul, and a third time hang up the captured armour before lord
Quirinus.'



And at this Aeneas, for he saw going by his side one excellent in beauty
and glittering in arms, but his brow had little cheer, and his eyes
looked down:



'Who, O my father, is he who thus attends him on his way? son, or other
of his children's princely race? How his comrades murmur around him! how
goodly of presence he is! but dark Night flutters round his head with
melancholy shade.'



Then lord Anchises with welling tears began: 'O my son, ask not of the
great sorrow of thy people. Him shall fate but shew to earth, and suffer
not to stay further. Too mighty, lords of heaven, did you deem the brood
of Rome, had this your gift been abiding. What moaning of men shall
arise from the Field of Mavors by the imperial city! what a funeral
train shalt thou see, O Tiber, as thou flowest by the new-made grave!
Neither shall the boyhood of any [876-901] of Ilian race raise his Latin
forefathers' hope so high; nor shall the land of Romulus ever boast of
any fosterling like this. Alas his goodness, alas his antique honour,
and right hand invincible in war! none had faced him unscathed in armed
shock, whether he met the foe on foot, or ran his spurs into the flanks
of his foaming horse. Ah me, the pity of thee, O boy! if in any wise
thou breakest the grim bar of fate, thou shalt be Marcellus. Give me
lilies in full hands; let me strew bright blossoms, and these gifts at
least let me lavish on my descendant's soul, and do the unavailing
service.'



Thus they wander up and down over the whole region of broad vaporous
plains, and scan all the scene. And when Anchises had led his son over
it, each point by each, and kindled his spirit with passion for the
glories on their way, he tells him thereafter of the war he next must
wage, and instructs him of the Laurentine peoples and the city of
Latinus, and in what wise each task may be turned aside or borne.



There are twin portals of Sleep, whereof the one is fabled of horn, and
by it real shadows are given easy outlet; the other shining white of
polished ivory, but false visions issue upward from the ghostly world.
With these words then Anchises follows forth his son and the Sibyl
together there, and dismisses them by the ivory gate. He pursues his way
to the ships and revisits his comrades; then bears on to Caieta's haven
straight along the shore. The anchor is cast from the prow; the sterns
are grounded on the beach.

=== AENEID BOOK 7 ===

THE LANDING IN LATIUM, AND THE ROLL OF THE ARMIES OF ITALY 


Thou also, Caieta, nurse of Aeneas, gavest our shores an everlasting
renown in death; and still thine honour haunts thy resting-place, and a
name in broad Hesperia, if that be glory, marks thy dust. But when the
last rites are duly paid, and the mound smoothed over the grave, good
Aeneas, now the high seas are hushed, bears on under sail and leaves his
haven. Breezes blow into the night, and the white moonshine speeds them
on; the sea glitters in her quivering radiance. Soon they skirt the
shores of Circe's land, where the rich daughter of the Sun makes her
untrodden groves echo with ceaseless song; and her stately house glows
nightlong with burning odorous cedarwood, as she runs over her delicate
web with the ringing comb. Hence are heard afar angry cries of lions
chafing at their fetters and roaring in the deep night; bears and
bristly swine rage in their pens, and vast shapes of wolves howl; whom
with her potent herbs the deadly divine Circe had disfashioned, face and
body, into wild beasts from the likeness of men. But lest the good
Trojans might suffer so dread a change, might enter her haven or draw
nigh the ominous shores, Neptune filled [23-55] their sails with
favourable winds, and gave them escape, and bore them past the seething
shallows.



And now the sea reddened with shafts of light, and high in heaven the
yellow dawn shone rose-charioted; when the winds fell, and every breath
sank suddenly, and the oar-blades toil through the heavy ocean-floor.
And on this Aeneas descries from sea a mighty forest. Midway in it the
pleasant Tiber stream breaks to sea in swirling eddies, laden with
yellow sand. Around and above fowl many in sort, that haunt his banks
and river-channel, solaced heaven with song and flew about the forest.
He orders his crew to bend their course and turn their prows to land,
and glides joyfully into the shady river.





Forth now, Erato! and I will unfold who were the kings, what the tides
of circumstance, how it was with ancient Latium when first that foreign
army drew their fleet ashore on Ausonia's coast; I will recall the
preluding of battle. Thou, divine one, inspire thou thy poet. I will
tell of grim wars, tell of embattled lines, of kings whom honour drove
on death, of the Tyrrhenian forces, and all Hesperia enrolled in arms. A
greater history opens before me, a greater work I essay.



Latinus the King, now growing old, ruled in a long peace over quiet
tilth and town. He, men say, was sprung of Faunus and the nymph Marica
of Laurentum. Faunus' father was Picus; and he boasts himself, Saturn,
thy son; thou art the first source of their blood. Son of his, by divine
ordinance, and male descent was none, cut off in the early spring of
youth. One alone kept the household and its august home, a daughter now
ripe for a husband and of full years for marriage. Many wooed her from
wide Latium and all Ausonia. Fairest and foremost of all [56-93] is
Turnus, of long and lordly ancestry; but boding signs from heaven, many
and terrible, bar the way. Within the palace, in the lofty inner courts,
was a laurel of sacred foliage, guarded in awe through many years, which
lord Latinus, it was said, himself found and dedicated to Phoebus when
first he would build his citadel; and from it gave his settlers their
name, Laurentines. High atop of it, wonderful to tell, bees borne with
loud humming across the liquid air girt it thickly about, and with
interlinked feet hung in a sudden swarm from the leafy bough.
Straightway the prophet cries: 'I see a foreigner draw nigh, an army
from the same quarter seek the same quarter, and reign high in our
fortress.' Furthermore, while maiden Lavinia stands beside her father
feeding the altars with holy fuel, she was seen, oh, horror! to catch
fire in her long tresses, and burn with flickering flame in all her
array, her queenly hair lit up, lit up her jewelled circlet; till,
enwreathed in smoke and lurid light, she scattered fire over all the
palace. That sight was rumoured wonderful and terrible. Herself, they
prophesied, she should be glorious in fame and fortune; but a great war
was foreshadowed for her people. But the King, troubled by the omen,
visits the oracle of his father Faunus the soothsayer, and the groves
deep under Albunea, where, queen of the woods, she echoes from her holy
well, and breathes forth a dim and deadly vapour. Hence do the tribes of
Italy and all the Oenotrian land seek answers in perplexity; hither the
priest bears his gifts, and when he hath lain down and sought slumber
under the silent night on the spread fleeces of slaughtered sheep, sees
many flitting phantoms of wonderful wise, hears manifold voices, and
attains converse of the gods, and hath speech with Acheron and the deep
tract of hell. Here then, likewise seeking an answer, lord Latinus paid
fit sacrifice of an hundred woolly ewes, and [94-127] lay couched on the
strewn fleeces they had worn. Out of the lofty grove a sudden voice was
uttered: 'Seek not, O my child, to unite thy daughter in Latin
espousals, nor trust her to the bridal chambers ready to thine hand;
foreigners shall come to be thy sons, whose blood shall raise our name
to heaven, and the children of whose race shall see, where the circling
sun looks on either ocean, all the rolling world swayed beneath their
feet.' This his father Faunus' answer and counsel given in the silent
night Latinus restrains not in his lips; but wide-flitting Rumour had
already borne it round among the Ausonian cities, when the children of
Laomedon moored their fleet to the grassy slope of the river bank.



Aeneas, with the foremost of his captains and fair Iülus, lay them down
under the boughs of a high tree and array the feast. They spread wheaten
cakes along the sward under their meats—so Jove on high prompted—and
crown the platter of corn with wilding fruits. Here haply when the rest
was spent, and scantness of food set them to eat their thin bread, and
with hand and venturous teeth do violence to the round cakes fraught
with fate and spare not the flattened squares: Ha! Are we eating our
tables too? cries Iülus jesting, and stops. At once that accent heard
set their toils a limit; and at once as he spoke his father caught it
from his lips and hushed him, in amazement at the omen. Straightway
'Hail, O land!' he cries, 'my destined inheritance! and hail, O
household gods, faithful to your Troy! here is home; this is our native
country. For my father Anchises, now I remember it, bequeathed me this
secret of fate: "When hunger shall drive thee, O son, to consume thy
tables where the feast fails, on the unknown shores whither thou shalt
sail; then, though outwearied, hope for home, and there at last let
thine hand remember to set thy house's foundations and bulwarks." This
was [128-162] the hunger, this the last that awaited us, to set the
promised end to our desolations . . . Up then, and, glad with the first
sunbeam, let us explore and search all abroad from our harbour, what is
the country, who its habitants, where is the town of the nation. Now
pour your cups to Jove, and call in prayer on Anchises our father,
setting the wine again upon the board.' So speaks he, and binding his
brows with a leafy bough, he makes supplication to the Genius of the
ground, and Earth first of deities, and the Nymphs, and the Rivers yet
unknown; then calls on Night and Night's rising signs, and next on Jove
of Ida, and our lady of Phrygia, and on his twain parents, in heaven and
in the under world. At this the Lord omnipotent thrice thundered sharp
from high heaven, and with his own hand shook out for a sign in the sky
a cloud ablaze with luminous shafts of gold. A sudden rumour spreads
among the Trojan array, that the day is come to found their destined
city. Emulously they renew the feast, and, glad at the high omen, array
the flagons and engarland the wine.



Soon as the morrow bathed the lands in its dawning light, they part to
search out the town, and the borders and shores of the nation: these are
the pools and spring of Numicus; this is the Tiber river; here dwell the
brave Latins. Then the seed of Anchises commands an hundred envoys
chosen of every degree to go to the stately royal city, all with the
wreathed boughs of Pallas, to bear him gifts and desire grace for the
Teucrians. Without delay they hasten on their message, and advance with
swift step. Himself he traces the city walls with a shallow trench, and
builds on it; and in fashion of a camp girdles this first settlement on
the shore with mound and battlements. And now his men had traversed
their way; they espied the towers and steep roofs of the Latins, and
drew near the wall. Before the city boys and men in their early
[163-196] bloom exercise on horseback, and break in their teams on the
dusty ground, or draw ringing bows, or hurl tough javelins from the
shoulder, and contend in running and boxing: when a messenger riding
forward brings news to the ears of the aged King that mighty men are
come thither in unknown raiment. He gives orders to call them within his
house, and takes his seat in the midst on his ancestral throne. His
house, stately and vast, crowned the city, upreared on an hundred
columns, once the palace of Laurentian Picus, amid awful groves of
ancestral sanctity. Here their kings receive the inaugural sceptre, and
have the fasces first raised before them; this temple was their
senate-house; this their sacred banqueting-hall; here, after sacrifice
of rams, the elders were wont to sit down at long tables. Further, there
stood arow in the entry images of the forefathers of old in ancient
cedar, Italus, and lord Sabinus, planter of the vine, still holding in
show the curved pruning-hook, and gray Saturn, and the likeness of Janus
the double-facing, and the rest of their primal kings, and they who had
borne wounds of war in fighting for their country. Armour besides hangs
thickly on the sacred doors, captured chariots and curved axes,
helmet-crests and massy gateway-bars, lances and shields, and beaks torn
from warships. He too sat there, with the divining-rod of Quirinus, girt
in the short augural gown, and carrying on his left arm the sacred
shield, Picus the tamer of horses; he whom Circe, desperate with amorous
desire, smote with her golden rod and turned by her poisons into a bird
with patches of colour on his wings. Of such wise was the temple of the
gods wherein Latinus, sitting on his father's seat, summoned the
Teucrians to his house and presence; and when they entered in, he thus
opened with placid mien:



'Tell, O Dardanians, for we are not ignorant of your city and race, nor
unheard of do you bend your course [197-228] overseas, what seek you?
what the cause or whereof the need that hath borne you over all these
blue waterways to the Ausonian shore? Whether wandering in your course,
or tempest-driven (such perils manifold on the high seas do sailors
suffer), you have entered the river banks and lie in harbour; shun not
our welcome, and be not ignorant that the Latins are Saturn's people,
whom no laws fetter to justice, upright of their own free will and the
custom of the god of old. And now I remember, though the story is dimmed
with years, thus Auruncan elders told, how Dardanus, born in this our
country, made his way to the towns of Phrygian Ida and to the Thracian
Samos that is now called Samothrace. Here was the home he left,
Tyrrhenian Corythus; now the palace of heaven, glittering with golden
stars, enthrones and adds him to the ranged altars of the gods.'



He ended; and Ilioneus pursued his speech with these words:



'King, Faunus' illustrious progeny, neither hath black tempest driven us
with stress of waves to shelter in your lands, nor hath star or shore
misled us on the way we went. Of set purpose and willing mind do we draw
nigh this thy city, outcasts from a realm once the greatest that the sun
looked on as he came from Olympus' utmost border. From Jove hath our
race beginning; in Jove the men of Dardania rejoice as ancestor; our
King himself of Jove's supreme race, Aeneas of Troy, hath sent us to thy
courts. How terrible the tempest that burst from fierce Mycenae over the
plains of Ida, driven by what fate Europe and Asia met in the shock of
two worlds, even he hath heard who is sundered in the utmost land where
the ocean surge recoils, and he whom stretching midmost of the four
zones the zone of the intolerable sun holds in severance. Borne by that
flood over many desolate seas, we crave a scant dwelling [229-261] for
our country's gods, an unmolested landing-place, and the air and water
that are free to all. We shall not disgrace the kingdom; nor will the
rumour of your renown be lightly gone or the grace of all you have done
fade away; nor will Ausonia be sorry to have taken Troy to her breast.
By the fortunes of Aeneas I swear, by that right hand mighty, whether
tried in friendship or in warlike arms, many and many a people and
nation—scorn us not because we advance with hands proffering chaplets
and words of supplication—hath sought us for itself and desired our
alliance; but yours is the land that heaven's high ordinance drove us
forth to find. Hence sprung Dardanus: hither Apollo recalls us, and
pushes us on with imperious orders to Tyrrhenian Tiber and the holy
pools of Numicus' spring. Further, he presents to thee these small
guerdons of our past estate, relics saved from burning Troy. From this
gold did lord Anchises pour libation at the altars; this was Priam's
array when he delivered statutes to the nations assembled in order; the
sceptre, the sacred mitre, the raiment wrought by the women of
Ilium. . . .'



At these words of Ilioneus Latinus holds his countenance in a steady
gaze, and stays motionless on the floor, casting his intent eyes around.
Nor does the embroidered purple so move the King, nor the sceptre of
Priam, as his daughter's marriage and the bridal chamber absorb him, and
the oracle of ancient Faunus stirs deep in his heart. This is he, the
wanderer from a foreign home, foreshewn of fate for his son, and called
to a realm of equal dominion, whose race should be excellent in valour
and their might overbear all the world. At last he speaks with good
cheer:



'The gods prosper our undertaking and their own augury! What thou
desirest, Trojan, shall be given; nor do I spurn your gifts. While
Latinus reigns you shall not [262-294] lack foison of rich land nor
Troy's own riches. Only let Aeneas himself come hither, if desire of us
be so strong, if he be in haste to join our friendship and be called our
ally. Let him not shrink in terror from a friendly face. A term of the
peace for me shall be to touch your monarch's hand. Do you now convey in
answer my message to your King. I have a daughter whom the oracles of my
father's shrine and many a celestial token alike forbid me to unite to
one of our own nation; sons shall come, they prophesy, from foreign
coasts, such is the destiny of Latium, whose blood shall exalt our name
to heaven. He it is on whom fate calls; this I think, this I choose, if
there be any truth in my soul's foreshadowing.'



Thus he speaks, and chooses horses for all the company. Three hundred
stood sleek in their high stalls; for all the Teucrians in order he
straightway commands them to be led forth, fleet-footed, covered with
embroidered purple: golden chains hang drooping over their chests,
golden their housings, and they champ on bits of ruddy gold: for the
absent Aeneas a chariot and pair of chariot horses of celestial breed,
with nostrils breathing flame; of the race of those which subtle Circe
bred by sleight on her father, the bastard issue of a stolen union. With
these gifts and words the Aeneadae ride back from Latinus carrying
peace.



And lo! the fierce wife of Jove was returning from Inachian Argos, and
held her way along the air, when out of the distant sky, far as from
Sicilian Pachynus, she espied the rejoicing of Aeneas and the Dardanian
fleet. She sees them already house-building, already trusting in the
land, their ships left empty. She stops, shot with sharp pain; then
shaking her head, she pours forth these words:



'Ah, hated brood, and doom of the Phrygians that thwarts our doom! Could
they perish on the Sigean [295-326] plains? Could they be ensnared when
taken? Did the fires of Troy consume her people? Through the midst of
armies and through the midst of flames they have found their way. But, I
think, my deity lies at last outwearied, or my hatred sleeps and is
satisfied? Nay, it is I who have been fierce to follow them over the
waves when hurled from their country, and on all the seas have crossed
their flight. Against the Teucrians the forces of sky and sea are spent.
What hath availed me Syrtes or Scylla, what desolate Charybdis? they
find shelter in their desired Tiber-bed, careless of ocean and of me.
Mars availed to destroy the giant race of the Lapithae; the very father
of the gods gave over ancient Calydon to Diana's wrath: for forfeit of
what crime in the Lapithae, what in Calydon? But I, Jove's imperial
consort, who have borne, ah me! to leave naught undared, who have
shifted to every device, I am vanquished by Aeneas. If my deity is not
great enough, I will not assuredly falter to seek succour where it may
be; if the powers of heaven are inflexible, I will stir up Acheron. It
may not be to debar him of a Latin realm; well; and Lavinia is destined
his bride unalterably. But it may be yet to defer, to make all this
action linger; but it may be yet to waste away the nation of either
king; at such forfeit of their people may son-in-law and father-in-law
enter into union. Blood of Troy and Rutulia shall be thy dower, O
maiden, and Bellona is the bridesmaid who awaits thee. Nor did Cisseus'
daughter alone conceive a firebrand and travail of bridal flames. Nay,
even such a birth hath Venus of her own, a second Paris, another
balefire for Troy towers reborn.'



These words uttered, she descends to earth in all her terrors, and calls
dolorous Allecto from the home of the Fatal Sisters in nether gloom,
whose delight is in woeful wars, in wrath and treachery and evil feuds:
hateful to [327-360] lord Pluto himself, hateful and horrible to her
hell-born sisters; into so many faces does she turn, so savage the guise
of each, so thick and black bristles she with vipers. And her Juno spurs
on with words, saying thus:



'Grant me, virgin born of Night, this thy proper task and service, that
the rumour of our renown may not crumble away, nor the Aeneadae have
power to win Latinus by marriage or beset the borders of Italy. Thou
canst set brothers once united in armed conflict, and overturn families
with hatreds; thou canst launch into houses thy whips and deadly brands;
thine are a thousand names, a thousand devices of injury. Stir up thy
teeming breast, sunder the peace they have joined, and sow seeds of
quarrel; let all at once desire and demand and seize on arms.'



Thereon Allecto, steeped in Gorgonian venom, first seeks Latium and the
high house of the Laurentine monarch, and silently sits down before
Amata's doors, whom a woman's distress and anger heated to frenzy over
the Teucrians' coming and the marriage of Turnus. At her the goddess
flings a snake out of her dusky tresses, and slips it into her bosom to
her very inmost heart, that she may embroil all her house under its
maddening magic. Sliding between her raiment and smooth breasts, it
coils without touch, and instils its viperous breath unseen; the great
serpent turns into the twisted gold about her neck, turns into the long
ribbon of her chaplet, inweaves her hair, and winds slippery over her
body. And while the gliding infection of the clammy poison begins to
penetrate her sense and run in fire through her frame, nor as yet hath
all her breast caught fire, softly she spoke and in mothers' wonted
wise, with many a tear over her daughter and the Phrygian bridal:



'Is it to exiles, to Teucrians, that Lavinia is proffered in marriage, O
father? and hast thou no compassion on [361-392] thy daughter and on
thyself? no compassion on her mother, whom with the first northern wind
the treacherous rover will abandon, steering to sea with his maiden
prize? Is it not thus the Phrygian herdsman wound his way to Lacedaemon,
and carried Leda's Helen to the Trojan towns? Where is thy plighted
faith? Where thine ancient care for thy people, and the hand Turnus thy
kinsman hath so often clasped? If one of alien race from the Latins is
sought for our son, if this stands fixed, and thy father Faunus'
commands are heavy upon thee, all the land whose freedom severs it from
our sway is to my mind alien, and of this is the divine word. And
Turnus, if one retrace the earliest source of his line, is born of
Inachus and Acrisius, and of the midmost of Mycenae.'



When in this vain essay of words she sees Latinus fixed against her, and
the serpent's maddening poison is sunk deep in her vitals and runs
through and through her, then indeed, stung by infinite horrors, hapless
and frenzied, she rages wildly through the endless city. As whilome a
top flying under the twisted whipcord, which boys busy at their play
drive circling wide round an empty hall, runs before the lash and spins
in wide gyrations; the witless ungrown band hang wondering over it and
admire the whirling boxwood; the strokes lend it life: with pace no
slacker is she borne midway through towns and valiant nations. Nay, she
flies into the woodland under feigned Bacchic influence, assumes a
greater guilt, arouses a greater frenzy, and hides her daughter in the
mountain coverts to rob the Teucrians of their bridal and stay the
marriage torches. 'Hail, Bacchus!' she shrieks and clamours; 'thou only
art worthy of the maiden; for to thee she takes up the lissom wands,
thee she circles in the dance, to thee she trains and consecrates her
tresses.' Rumour flies abroad; and the matrons, their breasts kindled by
the furies, run all at once [393-426] with a single ardour to seek out
strange dwellings. They have left their homes empty, they throw neck and
hair free to the winds; while others fill the air with ringing cries,
girt about with fawnskins, and carrying spears of vine. Amid them the
infuriate queen holds her blazing pine-torch on high, and chants the
wedding of Turnus and her daughter; and rolling her bloodshot gaze,
cries sudden and harsh: 'Hear, O mothers of Latium, wheresoever you be;
if unhappy Amata hath yet any favour in your affection, if care for a
mother's right pierces you, untie the chaplets from your hair, begin the
orgies with me.' Thus, amid woods and wild beasts' solitary places, does
Allecto goad the queen with the encircling Bacchic madness.



When their frenzy seemed heightened and her first task complete, the
purpose and all the house of Latinus turned upside down, the dolorous
goddess flies on thence, soaring on dusky wing, to the walls of the
gallant Rutulian, the city which Danaë, they say, borne down on the
boisterous south wind, built and planted with Acrision's people. The
place was called Ardea once of old; and still Ardea remains a mighty
name; but its fortune is no more. Here in his high house Turnus now took
rest in the black midnight. Allecto puts off her grim feature and the
body of a Fury; she transforms her face to an aged woman's, and furrows
her brow with ugly wrinkles; she puts on white tresses chaplet-bound,
and entwines them with an olive spray; she becomes aged Calybe,
priestess of Juno's temple, and presents herself before his eyes,
uttering thus:



'Turnus, wilt thou brook all these toils poured out in vain, and the
conveyance of thy crown to Dardanian settlers? The King denies thee thy
bride and the dower thy blood had earned; and a foreigner is sought for
heir to the kingdom. Forth now, dupe, and face thankless perils; forth,
cut down the Tyrrhenian lines; give the [427-458] Latins peace in thy
protection. This Saturn's omnipotent daughter in very presence commanded
me to pronounce to thee, as thou wert lying in the still night.
Wherefore arise, and make ready with good cheer to arm thy people and
march through thy gates to battle; consume those Phrygian captains that
lie with their painted hulls in the beautiful river. All the force of
heaven orders thee on. Let King Latinus himself know of it, unless he
consents to give thee thy bridal, and abide by his words, when he shall
at last make proof of Turnus' arms.'



But he, deriding her inspiration, with the words of his mouth thus
answers her again:



'The fleets ride on the Tiber wave; that news hath not, as thou deemest,
escaped mine ears. Frame not such terrors before me. Neither is Queen
Juno forgetful of us. . . . But thee, O mother, overworn old age, exhausted
and untrue, frets with vain distress, and amid embattled kings mocks thy
presage with false dismay. Thy charge it is to keep the divine image and
temple; war and peace shall be in the hands of men and warriors.'



At such words Allecto's wrath blazed out. But amid his utterance a quick
shudder overruns his limbs; his eyes are fixed in horror; so thickly
hiss the snakes of the Fury, so vast her form expands. Then rolling her
fiery eyes, she thrust him back as he would stammer out more, raised two
serpents in her hair, and, sounding her whip, resumed with furious tone:



'Behold me the overworn! me whom old age, exhausted and untrue, mocks
with false dismay amid embattled kings! Look on this! I am come from the
home of the Dread Sisters: war and death are in my hand. . . .' A traffic light blinked uselessly at the gates of Latium.



So speaking, she hurled her torch at him, and pierced his breast with
the lurid smoking brand. He breaks from sleep in overpowering fear, his
limbs and body bathed in [459-494] sweat that breaks out all over him;
he shrieks madly for arms, searches for arms on his bed and in his
palace. The passion of the sword rages high, the accursed fury of war,
and wrath over all: even as when flaming sticks are heaped roaring loud
under the sides of a seething cauldron, and the boiling water leaps up;
the river of water within smokes furiously and swells high in
overflowing foam, and now the wave contains itself no longer; the dark
steam flies aloft. So, for the stain of the broken peace, he orders his
chief warriors to march on King Latinus, and bids prepare for battle, to
defend Italy and drive the foe from their borders; himself will suffice
for Trojans and Latins together. When he uttered these words and called
the gods to hear his vows, the Rutulians stir one another up to arms.
One is moved by the splendour of his youthful beauty, one by his royal
ancestry, another by the noble deeds of his hand.



While Turnus fills the Rutulian minds with valour, Allecto on Stygian
wing hastens towards the Trojans. With fresh wiles she marked the spot
where beautiful Iülus was trapping and coursing game on the bank; here
the infernal maiden suddenly crosses his hounds with the maddening touch
of a familiar scent, and drives them hotly on the stag-hunt. This was
the source and spring of ill, and kindled the country-folk to war. The
stag, beautiful and high-antlered, was stolen from his mother's udder
and bred by Tyrrheus' boys and their father Tyrrheus, master of the
royal herds, and ranger of the plain. Their sister Silvia tamed him to
her rule, and lavished her care on his adornment, twining his antlers
with delicate garlands, and combed his wild coat and washed him in the
clear spring. Tame to her hand, and familiar to his master's table, he
would wander the woods, and, however late the night, return home to the
door he knew. Far astray, he floated idly down the stream, and allayed
his heat on the green bank, when Iülus' [495-528] mad hounds started him
in their hunting; and Ascanius himself, kindled with desire of the chief
honour, aimed a shaft from his bended bow. A present deity suffered not
his hand to stray, and the loud whistling reed came driven through his
belly and flanks. But the wounded beast fled within the familiar roof
and crept moaning to the courtyard, dabbled with blood, and filling all
the house with moans as of one beseeching. Sister Silvia, smiting her
arms with open hands, begins to call for aid, and gathers the hardy
rustics with her cries. They, for a fell destroyer is hidden in the
silent woodland, are there before her expectation, one armed with a
stake hardened in the fire, one with a heavy knotted trunk; what each
one searches and finds, wrath turns into a weapon. Tyrrheus cheers on
his array, panting hard, with his axe caught up in his hand, as he was
haply splitting an oaken log in four clefts with cross-driven wedges.



But the grim goddess, seizing from her watch-tower the moment of
mischief, seeks the steep farm-roof and sounds the pastoral war-note
from the ridge, straining the infernal cry on her twisted horn; it
spread shuddering over all the woodland, and echoed through the deep
forests: the lake of Trivia heard it afar; Nar river heard it with white
sulphurous water, and the springs of Velinus; and fluttered mothers
clasped their children to their breast. Then, hurrying to the voice of
the terrible trumpet-note, on all sides the wild rustics snatch their
arms and stream in: therewithal the men of Troy pour out from their
camp's open gates to succour Ascanius. The lines are ranged; not now in
rustic strife do they fight with hard trunks or burned stakes; the
two-edged steel sways the fight, the broad cornfields bristle dark with
drawn swords, and brass flashes smitten by the sunlight, and casts a
gleam high into the cloudy air: as when the wind begins to blow and the
flood [529-560] to whiten, gradually the sea lifts his waves higher and
yet higher, then rises from the bottom right into the air. Here in the
front rank young Almo, once Tyrrheus' eldest son, is struck down by a
whistling arrow; for the wound, staying in his throat, cut off in blood
the moist voice's passage and the thin life. Around many a one lies
dead, aged Galaesus among them, slain as he throws himself between them
for a peacemaker, once incomparable in justice and wealth of Ausonian
fields; for him five flocks bleated, a five-fold herd returned from
pasture, and an hundred ploughs upturned the soil.



But while thus in even battle they fight on the broad plain, the
goddess, her promise fulfilled, when she hath dyed the war in blood, and
mingled death in the first encounter, quits Hesperia, and, glancing
through the sky, addresses Juno in exultant tone:



'Lo, discord is ripened at thy desire into baleful war: tell them now to
mix in amity and join alliance. Insomuch as I have imbued the Trojans in
Ausonian blood, this likewise will I add, if I have assurance of thy
will. With my rumours I will sweep the bordering towns into war, and
kindle their spirit with furious desire for battle, that from all
quarters help may come; I will sow the land with arms.'



Then Juno answering: 'Terror and harm is wrought abundantly. The springs
of war are aflow: they fight with arms in their grasp, the arms that
chance first supplied, that fresh blood stains. Let this be the union,
this the bridal that Venus' illustrious progeny and Latinus the King
shall celebrate. Our Lord who reigns on Olympus' summit would not have
thee stray too freely in heaven's upper air. Withdraw thy presence.
Whatsoever future remains in the struggle, that I myself will sway.'



Such accents uttered the daughter of Saturn; and the [561-594] other
raises her rustling snaky wings and darts away from the high upper air
to Cocytus her home. There is a place midmost of Italy, deep in the
hills, notable and famed of rumour in many a country, the Vale of
Amsanctus; on either hand a wooded ridge, dark with thick foliage, hems
it in, and midway a torrent in swirling eddies shivers and echoes over
the rocks. Here is shewn a ghastly pool, a breathing-hole of the grim
lord of hell, and a vast chasm breaking into Acheron yawns with
pestilential throat. In it the Fury sank, and relieved earth and heaven
of her hateful influence.



But therewithal the queenly daughter of Saturn puts the last touch to
war. The shepherds pour in full tale from the battlefield into the town,
bearing back their slain, the boy Almo and Galaesus' disfigured face,
and cry on the gods and call on Latinus. Turnus is there, and amid the
heat and outcry at the slaughter redoubles his terrors, crying that
Teucrians are bidden to the kingdom, that a Phrygian race is mingling
its taint with theirs, and he is thrust out of their gates. They too,
the matrons of whose kin, struck by Bacchus, trample in choirs down the
pathless woods—nor is Amata's name a little thing—they too gather
together from all sides and weary themselves with the battle-cry. Omens
and oracles of gods go down before them, and all under malign influence
clamour for awful war. Emulously they surround Latinus' royal house. He
withstands, even as a rock in ocean unremoved, as a rock in ocean when
the great crash comes down, firm in its own mass among many waves
slapping all about: in vain the crags and boulders hiss round it in
foam, and the seaweed on its side is flung up and sucked away. But when
he may in nowise overbear their blind counsel, and all goes at fierce
Juno's beck, with many an appeal to gods and void sky, 'Alas!' he cries,
'we are broken of fate and driven helpless in the [595-626] storm. With
your very blood will you pay the price of this, O wretched men! Thee, O
Turnus, thy crime, thee thine awful punishment shall await; too late
wilt thou address to heaven thy prayers and supplication. For my rest
was won, and my haven full at hand; I am robbed but of a happy death.'
And without further speech he shut himself in the palace, and dropped
the reins of state.



There was a use in Hesperian Latium, which the Alban towns kept in holy
observance, now Rome keeps, the mistress of the world, when they stir
the War-God to enter battle; whether their hands prepare to carry war
and weeping among Getae or Hyrcanians or Arabs, or to reach to India and
pursue the Dawn, and reclaim their standards from the Parthian. There
are twain gates of War, so runs their name, consecrate in grim Mars'
sanctity and terror. An hundred bolts of brass and masses of everlasting
iron shut them fast, and Janus the guardian never sets foot from their
threshold. There, when the sentence of the Fathers stands fixed for
battle, the Consul, arrayed in the robe of Quirinus and the Gabine
cincture, with his own hand unbars the grating doors, with his own lips
calls battles forth; then all the rest follow on, and the brazen
trumpets blare harsh with consenting breath. With this use then likewise
they bade Latinus proclaim war on the Aeneadae, and unclose the baleful
gates. He withheld his hand, and shrank away averse from the abhorred
service, and hid himself blindly in the dark. Then the Saturnian queen
of heaven glided from the sky, with her own hand thrust open the
lingering gates, and swung sharply back on their hinges the iron-bound
doors of war. Ausonia is ablaze, till then unstirred and immoveable.
Some make ready to march afoot over the plains; some, mounted on tall
horses, ride amain in clouds of dust. All seek out arms; and now they
rub their shields smooth and make their spearheads glitter with
[627-659] fat lard, and grind their axes on the whetstone: rejoicingly
they advance under their standards and hear the trumpet note. Five great
cities set up the anvil and sharpen the sword, strong Atina and proud
Tibur, Ardea and Crustumeri, and turreted Antemnae. They hollow out
head-gear to guard them, and plait wickerwork round shield-bosses;
others forge breastplates of brass or smooth greaves of flexible silver.
To this is come the honour of share and pruning-hook, to this all the
love of the plough: they re-temper their fathers' swords in the furnace.
And now the trumpets blare; the watchword for war passes along. One
snatches a helmet hurriedly from his house, another backs his neighing
horses into the yoke; and arrays himself in shield and mail-coat
triple-linked with gold, and girds on his trusty sword.



Open now the gates of Helicon, goddesses, and stir the song of the kings
that rose for war, the array that followed each and filled the plains,
the men that even then blossomed, the arms that blazed in Italy the
bountiful land: for you remember, divine ones, and you can recall; to us
but a breath of rumour, scant and slight, is wafted down.



First from the Tyrrhene coast savage Mezentius, scorner of the gods,
opens the war and arrays his columns. By him is Lausus, his son,
unexcelled in bodily beauty by any save Laurentine Turnus, Lausus tamer
of horses and destroyer of wild beasts; he leads a thousand men who
followed him in vain from Agylla town; worthy to be happier in ancestral
rule, and to have other than Mezentius for father.



After them beautiful Aventinus, born of beautiful Hercules, displays on
the sward his palm-crowned chariot and victorious horses, and carries on
his shield his father's device, the hundred snakes of the Hydra's
serpent-wreath. Him, in the wood of the hill Aventine, Rhea the
priestess [660-693] bore by stealth into the borders of light, a woman
mingled with a god, after the Tirynthian Conqueror had slain Geryon and
set foot on the fields of Laurentum, and bathed his Iberian oxen in the
Tuscan river. These carry for war javelins and grim stabbing weapons,
and fight with the round shaft and sharp point of the Sabellian pike.
Himself he went on foot swathed in a vast lion skin, shaggy with
bristling terrors, whose white teeth encircled his head; in such wild
dress, the garb of Hercules clasped over his shoulders, he entered the
royal house.



Next twin brothers leave Tibur town, and the people called by their
brother Tiburtus' name, Catillus and valiant Coras, the Argives, and
advance in the forefront of battle among the throng of spears: as when
two cloud-born Centaurs descend from a lofty mountain peak, leaving
Homole or snowy Othrys in rapid race; the mighty forest yields before
them as they go, and the crashing thickets give them way.



Nor was the founder of Praeneste city absent, the king who, as every age
hath believed, was born of Vulcan among the pasturing herds, and found
beside the hearth, Caeculus. On him a rustic battalion attends in loose
order, they who dwell in steep Praeneste and the fields of Juno of
Gabii, on the cool Anio and the Hernican rocks dewy with streams; they
whom rich Anagnia, and whom thou, lord Amasenus, pasturest. Not all of
them have armour, nor shields and clattering chariots. The most part
shower bullets of dull lead; some wield in their hand two darts, and
have for head-covering caps of tawny wolfskin; their left foot is bare
wherewith to plant their steps; the other is covered with a boot of raw
hide.



But Messapus, tamer of horses, the seed of Neptune, whom none might ever
strike down with steel or fire, calls quickly to arms his long unstirred
peoples and bands [694-727] disused to war, and again handles the sword.
These are of the Fescennine ranks and of Aequi Falisci, these of
Soracte's fortresses and the fields of Flavina, and Ciminus' lake and
hill, and the groves of Capena. They marched in even time, singing their
King; as whilome snowy swans among the thin clouds, when they return
from pasturage, and utter resonant notes through their long necks; far
off echoes the river and the smitten Asian fen. . . . Nor would one think
these vast streaming masses were ranks clad in brass; rather that, high
in air, a cloud of hoarse birds from the deep gulf was pressing to the
shore.



Lo, Clausus of the ancient Sabine blood, leading a great host, a great
host himself; from whom now the Claudian tribe and family is spread
abroad since Rome was shared with the Sabines. Alongside is the broad
battalion of Amiternum, and the Old Latins, and all the force of Eretum
and the Mutuscan oliveyards; they who dwell in Nomentum town, and the
Rosean country by Velinus, who keep the crags of rough Tetrica and Mount
Severus, Casperia and Foruli, and the river of Himella; they who drink
of Tiber and Fabaris, they whom cold Nursia hath sent, and the squadrons
of Horta and the tribes of Latinium; and they whom Allia, the
ill-ominous name, severs with its current; as many as the waves that
roll on the Libyan sea-floor when fierce Orion sets in the wintry surge;
as thick as the ears that ripen in the morning sunlight on the plain of
the Hermus or the yellowing Lycian tilth. Their shields clatter, and
earth is amazed under the trampling of their feet.



Here Agamemnonian Halaesus, foe of the Trojan name, yokes his chariot
horses, and draws a thousand warlike peoples to Turnus; those who turn
with spades the Massic soil that is glad with wine; whom the elders of
Aurunca sent from their high hills, and the Sidicine low country
[728-761] hard by; and those who leave Cales, and the dweller by the
shallows of Volturnus river, and side by side the rough Saticulan and
the Oscan bands. Polished maces are their weapons, and these it is their
wont to fit with a tough thong; a target covers their left side, and for
close fighting they have crooked swords.



Nor shalt thou, Oebalus, depart untold of in our verses, who wast borne,
men say, by the nymph Sebethis to Telon, when he grew old in rule over
Capreae the Teleboïc realm: but not so content with his ancestral
fields, his son even then held down in wide sway the Sarrastian peoples
and the meadows watered by Sarnus, and the dwellers in Rufrae and
Batulum, and the fields of Celemnae, and they on whom from her apple
orchards Abella city looks down. Their wont was to hurl lances in
Teutonic fashion; their head covering was stripped bark of the cork
tree, their shield-plates glittering brass, glittering brass their
sword.



Thee too, Ufens, mountainous Nersae sent forth to battle, of noble fame
and prosperous arms, whose race on the stiff Aequiculan clods is rough
beyond all other, and bred to continual hunting in the woodland; they
till the soil in arms, and it is ever their delight to drive in fresh
spoils and live on plunder.



Furthermore there came, sent by King Archippus, the priest of the
Marruvian people, dressed with prosperous olive leaves over his helmet,
Umbro excellent in valour, who was wont with charm and touch to sprinkle
slumberous dew on the viper's brood and water-snakes of noisome breath.
Yet he availed not to heal the stroke of the Dardanian spear-point, nor
was the wound of him helped by his sleepy charms and herbs culled on the
Massic hills. Thee the woodland of Angitia, thee Fucinus' glassy wave,
thee the clear pools wept. . . .



Likewise the seed of Hippolytus marched to war, Virbius [762-796] most
excellent in beauty, sent by his mother Aricia. The groves of Egeria
nursed him round the spongy shore where Diana's altar stands rich and
gracious. For they say in story that Hippolytus, after he fell by his
stepmother's treachery, torn asunder by his frightened horses to fulfil
a father's revenge, came again to the daylight and heaven's upper air,
recalled by Diana's love and the drugs of the Healer. Then the Lord
omnipotent, indignant that any mortal should rise from the nether shades
to the light of life, launched his thunder and hurled down to the
Stygian water the Phoebus-born, the discoverer of such craft and cure.
But Trivia the bountiful hides Hippolytus in a secret habitation, and
sends him away to the nymph Egeria and the woodland's keeping, where,
solitary in Italian forests, he should spend an inglorious life, and
have Virbius for his altered name. Whence also hoofed horses are kept
away from Trivia's temple and consecrated groves, because, affrighted at
the portents of the sea, they overset the chariot and flung him out upon
the shore. Notwithstanding did his son train his ruddy steeds on the
level plain, and sped charioted to war.



Himself too among the foremost, splendid in beauty of body, Turnus moves
armed and towers a whole head over all. His lofty helmet, triple-tressed
with horse-hair, holds high a Chimaera breathing from her throat Aetnean
fires, raging the more and exasperate with baleful flames, as the battle
and bloodshed grow fiercer. But on his polished shield was emblazoned in
gold Io with uplifted horns, already a heifer and overgrown with hair, a
lofty design, and Argus the maiden's warder, and lord Inachus pouring
his stream from his embossed urn. Behind comes a cloud of infantry, and
shielded columns thicken over all the plains; the Argive men and
Auruncan forces, the Rutulians and old Sicanians, the Sacranian ranks
and Labicians with [797-817] painted shields; they who till thy dells, O
Tiber, and Numicus' sacred shore, and whose ploughshare goes up and down
on the Rutulian hills and the Circaean headland, over whose fields
Jupiter of Anxur watches, and Feronia glad in her greenwood: and where
the marsh of Satura lies black, and cold Ufens winds his way along the
valley-bottoms and sinks into the sea.



Therewithal came Camilla the Volscian, leading a train of cavalry,
squadrons splendid with brass: a warrior maiden who had never used her
woman's hands to Minerva's distaff or wool-baskets, but hardened to
endure the battle shock and outstrip the winds with racing feet. She
might have flown across the topmost blades of unmown corn and left the
tender ears unhurt as she ran; or sped her way over mid sea upborne by
the swelling flood, nor dipt her swift feet in the water. All the people
pour from house and field, and mothers crowd to wonder and gaze at her
as she goes, in rapturous astonishment at the royal lustre of purple
that drapes her smooth shoulders, at the clasp of gold that intertwines
her tresses, at the Lycian quiver she carries, and the pastoral myrtle
shaft topped with steel.

=== AENEID BOOK 8 ===

THE EMBASSAGE TO EVANDER 


When Turnus ran up the flag of war on the towers of Laurentum, and the
trumpets blared with harsh music, when he spurred his fiery steeds and
clashed his armour, straightway men's hearts are in tumult; all Latium
at once flutters in banded uprisal, and her warriors rage furiously.
Their chiefs, Messapus, and Ufens, and Mezentius, scorner of the gods,
begin to enrol forces on all sides, and dispeople the wide fields of
husbandmen. Venulus too is sent to the town of mighty Diomede to seek
succour, to instruct him that Teucrians set foot in Latium; that Aeneas
in his fleet invades them with the vanquished gods of his home, and
proclaims himself the King summoned of fate; that many tribes join the
Dardanian, and his name swells high in Latium. What he will rear on
these foundations, what issue of battle he desires, if Fortune attend
him, lies clearer to his own sight than to King Turnus or King Latinus.



Thus was it in Latium. And the hero of Laomedon's blood, seeing it all,
tosses on a heavy surge of care, and throws his mind rapidly this way
and that, and turns it on all hands in swift change of thought: even as
when the quivering light of water brimming in brass, struck back
[23-56] from the sunlight or the moon's glittering reflection, flickers
abroad over all the room, and now mounts aloft and strikes the high
panelled roof. Night fell, and over all lands weary creatures were fast
in deep slumber, the race of fowl and of cattle; when lord Aeneas, sick
at heart of the dismal warfare, stretched him on the river bank under
the cope of the cold sky, and let sleep, though late, overspread his
limbs. To him the very god of the ground, the pleasant Tiber stream,
seemed to raise his aged form among the poplar boughs; thin lawn veiled
him with its gray covering, and shadowy reeds hid his hair. Thereon he
addressed him thus, and with these words allayed his distresses:



'O born of the family of the gods, thou who bearest back our Trojan city
from hostile hands, and keepest Troy towers in eternal life; O long
looked for on Laurentine ground and Latin fields! here is thine assured
home, thine home's assured gods. Draw not thou back, nor be alarmed by
menace of war. All the anger and wrath of the gods is passed away . . .
And even now for thine assurance, that thou think not this the idle
fashioning of sleep, a great sow shall be found lying under the oaks on
the shore, with her new-born litter of thirty head: white she couches on
the ground, and the brood about her teats is white. By this token in
thirty revolving years shall Ascanius found a city, Alba of bright name.
My prophecy is sure. Now hearken, and I will briefly instruct thee how
thou mayest unravel and overcome thy present task. An Arcadian people
sprung of Pallas, following in their king Evander's company beneath his
banners, have chosen a place in these coasts, and set a city on the
hills, called Pallanteum after Pallas their forefather. These wage
perpetual war with the Latin race; these do thou take to thy camp's
alliance, and join with them in league. Myself I [57-89] will lead thee
by my banks and straight along my stream, that thou mayest oar thy way
upward against the river. Up and arise, goddess-born, and even with the
setting stars address thy prayers to Juno as is meet, and vanquish her
wrath and menaces with humble vows. To me thou shalt pay a conqueror's
sacrifice. I am he whom thou seest washing the banks with full flood and
severing the rich tilth, glassy Tiber, best beloved by heaven of rivers.
Here is my stately home; my fountain-head is among high cities.'



Thus spoke the River, and sank in the depth of the pool: night and sleep
left Aeneas. He arises, and, looking towards the radiant sky of the
sunrising, holds up water from the river in fitly-hollowed palms, and
pours to heaven these accents:



'Nymphs, Laurentine Nymphs, from whom is the generation of rivers, and
thou, O father Tiber, with thine holy flood, receive Aeneas and deign to
save him out of danger. What pool soever holds thy source, who pitiest
our discomforts, from whatsoever soil thou dost spring excellent in
beauty, ever shall my worship, ever my gifts frequent thee, the hornèd
river lord of Hesperian waters. Ah, be thou only by me, and graciously
confirm thy will.' So speaks he, and chooses two galleys from his fleet,
and mans them with rowers, and withal equips a crew with arms.



And lo! suddenly, ominous and wonderful to tell, the milk-white sow, of
one colour with her white brood, is espied through the forest couched on
the green brink; whom to thee, yes to thee, queenly Juno, good Aeneas
offers in sacrifice, and sets with her offspring before thine altar. All
that night long Tiber assuaged his swelling stream, and silently stayed
his refluent wave, smoothing the surface of his waters to the fashion of
still pool and quiet mere, to spare [90-121] labour to the oar. So they
set out and speed on their way with prosperous cries; the painted fir
slides along the waterway; the waves and unwonted woods marvel at their
far-gleaming shields, and the gay hulls afloat on the river. They
outwear a night and a day in rowing, ascend the long reaches, and pass
under the chequered shadows of the trees, and cut through the green
woodland in the calm water. The fiery sun had climbed midway in the
circle of the sky when they see afar fortress walls and scattered house
roofs, where now the might of Rome hath risen high as heaven; then
Evander held a slender state. Quickly they turn their prows to land and
draw near the town.



It chanced on that day the Arcadian king paid his accustomed sacrifice
to the great son of Amphitryon and all the gods in a grove before the
city. With him his son Pallas, with him all the chief of his people and
his poor senate were offering incense, and the blood steamed warm at
their altars. When they saw the high ships, saw them glide up between
the shady woodlands and rest on their silent oars, the sudden sight
appals them, and all at once they rise and stop the banquet. Pallas
courageously forbids them to break off the rites; snatching up a spear,
he flies forward, and from a hillock cries afar: 'O men, what cause hath
driven you to explore these unknown ways? or whither do you steer? What
is your kin, whence your habitation? Is it peace or arms you carry
hither?' Then from the lofty stern lord Aeneas thus speaks, stretching
forth in his hand an olive bough of peace-bearing:



'Thou seest men born of Troy and arms hostile to the Latins, who have
driven us to flight in insolent warfare. We seek Evander; carry this
message, and tell him that chosen men of the Dardanian captains are come
pleading for an armed alliance.'



Pallas stood amazed at the august name. 'Descend,' [122-154] he cries,
'whoso thou art, and speak with my father face to face, and enter our
home and hospitality.' And giving him the grasp of welcome, he caught
and clung to his hand. Advancing, they enter the grove and leave the
river. Then Aeneas in courteous words addresses the King:



'Best of the Grecian race, thou whom fortune hath willed that I
supplicate, holding before me boughs dressed in fillets, no fear stayed
me because thou wert a Grecian chief and an Arcadian, or allied by
descent to the twin sons of Atreus. Nay, mine own prowess and the
sanctity of divine oracles, our ancestral kinship, and the fame of thee
that is spread abroad over the earth, have allied me to thee and led me
willingly on the path of fate. Dardanus, who sailed to the Teucrian
land, the first father and founder of the Ilian city, was born, as
Greeks relate, of Electra the Atlantid; Electra's sire is ancient Atlas,
whose shoulder sustains the heavenly spheres. Your father is Mercury,
whom white Maia conceived and bore on the cold summit of Cyllene; but
Maia, if we give any credence to report, is daughter of Atlas, that same
Atlas who bears up the starry heavens; so both our families branch from
a single blood. In this confidence I sent no embassy, I framed no crafty
overtures; myself I have presented mine own person, and come a suppliant
to thy courts. The same Daunian race pursues us and thee in merciless
warfare; we once expelled, they trust nothing will withhold them from
laying all Hesperia wholly beneath their yoke, and holding the seas that
wash it above and below. Accept and return our friendship. We can give
brave hearts in war, high souls and men approved in deeds.'



Aeneas ended. The other ere now scanned in a long gaze the face and eyes
and all the form of the speaker; then thus briefly returns:



'How gladly, bravest of the Teucrians, do I hail and [155-188] own thee!
how I recall thy father's words and the very tone and glance of great
Anchises! For I remember how Priam son of Laomedon, when he sought
Salamis on his way to the realm of his sister Hesione, went on to visit
the cold borders of Arcadia. Then early youth clad my cheeks with bloom.
I admired the Teucrian captains, admired their lord, the son of
Laomedon; but Anchises moved high above them all. My heart burned with
youthful passion to accost him and clasp hand in hand; I made my way to
him, and led him eagerly to Pheneus' high town. Departing he gave me an
adorned quiver and Lycian arrows, a scarf inwoven with gold, and a pair
of golden bits that now my Pallas possesses. Therefore my hand is
already joined in the alliance you seek, and soon as to-morrow's dawn
rises again over earth, I will send you away rejoicing in mine aid, and
supply you from my store. Meanwhile, since you are come hither in
friendship, solemnise with us these yearly rites which we may not defer,
and even now learn to be familiar at your comrades' board.'



This said, he commands the feast and the wine-cups to be replaced whence
they were taken, and with his own hand ranges them on the grassy seat,
and welcomes Aeneas to the place of honour, with a lion's shaggy fell
for cushion and a hospitable chair of maple. Then chosen men with the
priest of the altar in emulous haste bring roasted flesh of bulls, and
pile baskets with the gift of ground corn, and serve the wine. Aeneas
and the men of Troy with him feed on the long chines of oxen and the
entrails of the sacrifice.



After hunger is driven away and the desire of food stayed, King Evander
speaks: 'No idle superstition that knows not the gods of old hath
ordered these our solemn rites, this customary feast, this altar of
august sanctity; saved from bitter perils, O Trojan guest, do we
worship, and [189-225] most due are the rites we inaugurate. Look now
first on this overhanging cliff of stone, where shattered masses lie
strewn, and the mountain dwelling stands desolate, and rocks are rent
away in vast ruin. Here was a cavern, awful and deep-withdrawn,
impenetrable to the sunbeams, where the monstrous half-human shape of
Cacus had his hold: the ground was ever wet with fresh slaughter, and
pallid faces of men, ghastly with gore, hung nailed on the haughty
doors. This monster was the son of Vulcan, and spouted his black fires
from his mouth as he moved in giant bulk. To us also in our desire time
bore a god's aid and arrival. For princely Alcides the avenger came
glorious in the spoils of triple Geryon slain; this way the Conqueror
drove the huge bulls, and his oxen filled the river valley. But savage
Cacus, infatuate to leave nothing undared or unhandled in craft or
crime, drives four bulls of choice shape away from their pasturage, and
as many heifers of excellent beauty. And these, that there should be no
straightforward footprints, he dragged by the tail into his cavern, the
track of their compelled path reversed, and hid them behind the screen
of rock. No marks were there to lead a seeker to the cavern. Meanwhile
the son of Amphitryon, his herds filled with food, was now breaking up
his pasturage and making ready to go. The oxen low as they depart; all
the woodland is filled with their complaint as they clamorously quit the
hills. One heifer returned the cry, and, lowing from the depth of the
dreary cave, baffled the hope of Cacus from her imprisonment. At this
the grief and choler of Alcides blazed forth dark and infuriate. Seizing
in his hand his club of heavy knotted oak, he seeks with swift pace the
aery mountain steep. Then, as never before, did we see Cacus afraid and
his countenance troubled; he goes flying swifter than the wind and seeks
his cavern; fear wings his feet. As he shut himself in, and, bursting
the [226-260] chains, dropped the vast rock slung in iron by his
father's craft, and blocked the doorway with its pressure, lo! the
Tirynthian came in furious wrath, and, scanning all the entry, turned
his face this way and that and ground his teeth. Thrice, hot with rage,
he circles all Mount Aventine; thrice he assails the rocky portals in
vain; thrice he sinks down outwearied in the valley. There stood a sharp
rock of flint with sides cut sheer away, rising over the cavern's ridge
a vast height to see, fit haunt for foul birds to build on. This—for,
sloping from the ridge, it leaned on the left towards the river—he
loosened, urging it from the right till he tore it loose from its deep
foundations; then suddenly shook it free; with the shock the vast sky
thunders, the banks leap apart, and the amazed river recoils. But the
den, Cacus' huge palace, lay open and revealed, and the depths of gloomy
cavern were made manifest; even as though some force tearing earth apart
should unlock the infernal house, and disclose the pallid realms
abhorred of heaven, and deep down the monstrous gulf be descried where
the ghosts flutter in the streaming daylight. On him then, surprised in
unexpected light, shut in the rock's recesses and howling in strange
fashion, Alcides from above hurls missiles and calls all his arms to
aid, and presses hard on him with boughs and enormous millstones. And
he, for none other escape from peril is left, vomits from his throat
vast jets of smoke, wonderful to tell, and enwreathes his dwelling in
blind gloom, blotting view from the eyes, while in the cave's depth
night thickens with smoke-bursts in a darkness shot with fire. Alcides
broke forth in anger, and with a bound hurled himself sheer amid the
flames, where the smoke rolls billowing and voluminous, and the cloud
surges black through the enormous den. Here, as Cacus in the darkness
spouts forth his idle fires, he grasps and twines tight round him, till
his eyes start out and his throat [261-295] is drained of blood under
the strangling pressure. Straightway the doors are torn open and the
dark house laid plain; the stolen oxen and forsworn plunder are shewn
forth to heaven, and the misshapen carcase dragged forward by the feet.
Men cannot satisfy their soul with gazing on the terrible eyes, the
monstrous face and shaggy bristling chest, and the throat with its
quenched fires. Thenceforth this sacrifice is solemnised, and a younger
race have gladly kept the day; Potitius the inaugurator, and the
Pinarian family, guardians of the rites of Hercules, have set in the
grove this altar, which shall ever be called of us Most Mighty, and
shall be our mightiest evermore. Wherefore arise, O men, and enwreathe
your hair with leafy sprays, and stretch forth the cups in your hands;
call on our common god and pour the glad wine.' He ended; when the
twy-coloured poplar of Hercules hid his shaded hair with pendulous
plaited leaf, and the sacred goblet filled his hand. Speedily all pour
glad libation on the board, and supplicate the gods.



Meanwhile the evening star draws nigher down the slope of heaven, and
now the priests went forth, Potitius at their head, girt with skins
after their fashion, and bore torches aflame. They renew the banquet,
and bring the grateful gift of a second repast, and heap the altars with
loaded platters. Then the Salii stand round the lit altar-fires to sing,
their brows bound with poplar boughs, one chorus of young men, one of
elders, and extol in song the praises and deeds of Hercules; how first
he strangled in his gripe the twin terrors, the snakes of his
stepmother; how he likewise shattered in war famous cities, Troy and
Oechalia; how under Eurystheus the King he bore the toil of a thousand
labours by Juno's malign decrees. Thine hand, unconquered, slays the
cloud-born double-bodied race, Hylaeus and Pholus, the Cretan monster,
and the huge lion in the hollow Nemean rock. Before thee the Stygian
pools [296-329] shook for fear, before thee the warder of hell, couched
on half-gnawn bones in his blood-stained cavern; to thee not any form
was terrible, not Typhoeus' self towering in arms; thou wast not bereft
of counsel when the snake of Lerna encompassed thee with thronging
heads. Hail, true seed of Jove, deified glory! graciously visit us and
these thy rites with favourable feet. Such are their songs of praise;
they crown all with the cavern of Cacus and its fire-breathing lord. All
the woodland echoes with their clamour, and the hills resound.



Thence all at once, the sacred rites accomplished, retrace their way to
the city. The age-worn King walked holding Aeneas and his son by his
side for companions on his way, and lightened the road with changing
talk. Aeneas admires and turns his eyes lightly round about, pleased
with the country; and gladly on spot after spot inquires and hears of
the memorials of earlier men. Then King Evander, founder of the fortress
of Rome:



'In these woodlands dwelt Fauns and Nymphs sprung of the soil, and a
tribe of men born of stocks and hard oak; who had neither law nor grace
of life, nor did they know to yoke bulls or lay up stores or save their
gains, but were nurtured by the forest boughs and the hard living of the
huntsman. Long ago Saturn came from heaven on high in flight before
Jove's arms, an exile from his lost realm. He gathered together the
unruly race scattered on the mountain heights, and gave them statutes,
and chose Latium to be their name, since in these borders he had found a
safe hiding-place. Beneath his reign were the ages named of gold; thus,
in peace and quietness, did he rule the nations; till gradually there
crept in a sunken and stained time, the rage of war, and the lust of
possession. Then came the Ausonian clan and the tribes of Sicania, and
many a time the land of Saturn put away her name. Then were kings,
[330-364] and fierce Thybris with his giant bulk, from whose name we of
Italy afterwards called the Tiber river, when it lost the true name of
old, Albula. Me, cast out from my country and following the utmost
limits of the sea, Fortune the omnipotent and irreversible doom settled
in this region; and my mother the Nymph Carmentis' awful warnings and
Apollo's divine counsel drove me hither.'



Scarce was this said; next advancing he points out the altar and the
Carmental Gate, which the Romans call anciently by that name in honour
of the Nymph Carmentis, seer and soothsayer, who sang of old the coming
greatness of the Aeneadae and the glory of Pallanteum. Next he points
out the wide grove where valiant Romulus set his sanctuary, and the
Lupercal in the cool hollow of the rock, dedicate to Lycean Pan after
the manner of Parrhasia. Therewithal he shows the holy wood of
Argiletum, and calls the spot to witness as he tells the slaying of his
guest Argus. Hence he leads him to the Tarpeian house, and the Capitol
golden now, of old rough with forest thickets. Even then men trembled
before the wood and rock. 'This grove,' he cries, 'this hill with its
leafy crown, is a god's dwelling, though whose we know not; the
Arcadians believe Jove himself hath been visible, when often he shook
the darkening aegis in his hand and gathered the storm-clouds. Thou
seest these two towns likewise with walls overthrown, relics and
memorials of men of old. This fortress lord Janus built, this Saturn;
the name of this was once Janiculum, of that Saturnia.'



With such mutual words they drew nigh the house of poor Evander, and saw
scattered herds lowing on the Roman Forum and down the gay Carinae. When
they reached his dwelling, 'This threshold,' he cries, 'Alcides the
Conqueror stooped to cross; in this palace he rested. Dare thou, my
guest, to despise riches; mould thyself to [365-396] like dignity of
godhead, and come not exacting to our poverty.' He spoke, and led tall
Aeneas under the low roof of his narrow dwelling, and laid him on a
couch of stuffed leaves and the skin of a Libyan she-bear. Night falls
and clasps the earth in her dusky wings.



But Venus, stirred in spirit by no vain mother's alarms, and moved by
the threats and stern uprisal of the Laurentines, addresses herself to
Vulcan, and in her golden bridal chamber begins thus, breathing divine
passion in her speech:



'While Argolic kings wasted in war the doomed towers of Troy, the
fortress fated to fall in hostile fires, no succour did I require for
her wretched people, no weapons of thine art and aid: nor would I task,
dear my lord, thee or thy toils for naught, though I owed many and many
a debt to the children of Priam, and had often wept the sore labour of
Aeneas. Now by Jove's commands he hath set foot in the Rutulian borders;
I now therefore come with entreaty, and ask armour of the god I worship.
For the son she bore, the tears of Nereus' daughter, of Tithonus'
consort, could melt thine heart. Look what nations are gathering, what
cities bar their gates and sharpen the sword against me for the
desolation of my children.'



The goddess ended, and, as he hesitates, clasps him round in the soft
embrace of her snowy arms. He suddenly caught the wonted flame, and the
heat known of old pierced him to the heart and overran his melting
frame: even as when, bursting from the thunder peal, a sparkling cleft
of fire shoots through the storm-clouds with dazzling light. His consort
knew, rejoiced in her wiles, and felt her beauty. Then her lord speaks,
enchained by Love the immortal:



'Why these far-fetched pleas? Whither, O goddess, is thy trust in me
gone? Had like distress been thine, [397-431] even then we might
unblamed have armed thy Trojans, nor did doom nor the Lord omnipotent
forbid Troy to stand, and Priam to survive yet ten other years. And now,
if thou purposest war, and this is thy counsel, whatever charge I can
undertake in my craft, in aught that may be made of iron or molten
electrum, whatever fire and air can do, cease thou to entreat as
doubtful of thy strength.' These words spoken, he clasped his wife in
the desired embrace, and, sinking in her lap, wooed quiet slumber to
overspread his limbs.



Thereon, so soon as sleep, now in mid-career of waning night, had given
rest and gone; soon as a woman, whose task is to sustain life with her
distaff and the slender labours of the loom, kindles the ashes of her
slumbering fire, her toil encroaching on the night, and sets a long task
of fire-lit spinning to her maidens, that so she may keep her husband's
bed unsullied and nourish her little children,—even so the Lord of
Fire, nor slacker in his hours than she, rises from his soft couch to
the work of his smithy. An island rises by the side of Sicily and
Aeolian Lipare, steep with smoking cliffs, whereunder the vaulted and
thunderous Aetnean caverns are hollowed out for Cyclopean forges, the
strong strokes on the anvils echo in groans, ore of steel hisses in the
vaults, and the fire pants in the furnaces: the house of Vulcan, and
Vulcania the land's name. Hither now the Lord of Fire descends from
heaven's height. In the vast cavern the Cyclopes were forging iron,
Brontes and Steropes and Pyracmon with bared limbs. Shaped in their
hands was a thunderbolt, in part already polished, such as the Father of
Heaven hurls down on earth in multitudes, part yet unfinished. Three
coils of frozen rain, three of watery mist they had enwrought in it,
three of ruddy fire and winged south wind; now they were mingling in
their work the awful splendours, the sound and terror, and the
[432-469] angry pursuing flames. Elsewhere they hurried on a chariot for
Mars with flying wheels, wherewith he stirs up men and cities; and
burnished the golden serpent-scales of the awful aegis, the armour of
wrathful Pallas, and the entwined snakes on the breast of the goddess,
the Gorgon head with severed neck and rolling eyes. 'Away with all!' he
cries: 'stop your tasks unfinished, Cyclopes of Aetna, and attend to
this; a warrior's armour must be made. Now must strength, now quickness
of hand be tried, now all our art lend her guidance. Fling off delay.'
He spoke no more; but they all bent rapidly to the work, allotting their
labours equally. Brass and ore of gold flow in streams, and wounding
steel is molten in the vast furnace. They shape a mighty shield, to
receive singly all the weapons of the Latins, and weld it sevenfold,
circle on circle. Some fill and empty the windy bellows of their blast,
some dip the hissing brass in the trough. They raise their arms mightily
in responsive time, and turn the mass of metal about in the grasp of
their tongs.



While the lord of Lemnos is busied thus in the borders of Aeolia,
Evander is roused from his low dwelling by the gracious daylight and the
matin songs of birds from the eaves. The old man arises, and draws on
his body raiment, and ties the Tyrrhene shoe latchets about his feet;
then buckles to his side and shoulder his Tegeaean sword, and swathes
himself in a panther skin that droops upon his left. Therewithal two
watch-dogs go before him from the high threshold, and accompany their
master's steps. The hero sought his guest Aeneas in the privacy of his
dwelling, mindful of their talk and his promised bounty. Nor did Aeneas
fail to be astir with the dawn. With the one went his son Pallas, with
the other Achates. They meet and clasp hands, and, sitting down within
the house, at length enjoy unchecked converse. The King begins thus: . . .




[470-505] 'Princely chief of the Teucrians, in whose lifetime I will
never allow the state or realm of Troy vanquished, our strength is scant
to succour in war for so great a name. On this side the Tuscan river
shuts us in; on that the Rutulian drives us hard, and thunders in arms
about our walls. But I purpose to unite to thee mighty peoples and the
camp of a wealthy realm; an unforeseen chance offers this for thy
salvation. Fate summons thy approach. Not far from here stands fast
Agylla city, an ancient pile of stone, where of old the Lydian race,
eminent in war, settled on the Etruscan ridges. For many years it
flourished, till King Mezentius ruled it with insolent sway and armed
terror. Why should I relate the horrible murders, the savage deeds of
the monarch? May the gods keep them in store for himself and his line!
Nay, he would even link dead bodies to living, fitting hand to hand and
face to face (the torture!), and in the oozy foulness and corruption of
the dreadful embrace so slay them by a lingering death. But at last his
citizens, outwearied by his mad excesses, surround him and his house in
arms, cut down his comrades, and hurl fire on his roof. Amid the
massacre he escaped to the refuge of Rutulian land and the armed defence
of Turnus' friendship. So all Etruria hath risen in righteous fury, and
in immediate battle claim their king for punishment. Over these
thousands will I make thee chief, O Aeneas; for their noisy ships crowd
all the shore, and they bid the standards advance, while the aged
diviner stays them with prophecies: "O chosen men of Maeonia, flower and
strength of them, of old time, whom righteous anger urges on the enemy,
and Mezentius inflames with deserved wrath, to no Italian is it
permitted to hold this great nation in control: choose foreigners to
lead you." At that, terrified by the divine warning, the Etruscan lines
have encamped on the plain; Tarchon himself hath sent ambassadors to me
with the crown [506-539] and sceptre of the kingdom, and offers the
royal attire will I but enter their camp and take the Tyrrhene realm.
But old age, frozen to dulness, and exhausted with length of life,
denies me the load of empire, and my prowess is past its day. I would
urge it on my son, did not the mixture of blood by his Sabellian mother
make this half his native land. Thou, to whose years and race alike the
fates extend their favour, on whom fortune calls, enter thou in, a
leader supreme in bravery over Teucrians and Italians. Mine own Pallas
likewise, our hope and comfort, I will send with thee; let him grow used
to endure warfare and the stern work of battle under thy teaching, to
regard thine actions, and from his earliest years look up to thee. To
him will I give two hundred Arcadian cavalry, the choice of our warlike
strength, and Pallas as many more to thee in his own name.'



Scarce had he ended; Aeneas, son of Anchises, and trusty Achates gazed
with steadfast face, and, sad at heart, were revolving inly many a
labour, had not the Cytherean sent a sign from the clear sky. For
suddenly a flash and peal comes quivering from heaven, and all seemed in
a moment to totter, and the Tyrrhene trumpet-blast to roar along the
sky. They look up; again and yet again the heavy crash re-echoes. They
see in the serene space of sky armour gleam red through a cloud in the
clear air, and ring clashing out. The others stood in amaze; but the
Trojan hero knew the sound for the promise of his goddess mother; then
he speaks: 'Ask not, O friend, ask not in any wise what fortune this
presage announces; it is I who am summoned of heaven. This sign the
goddess who bore me foretold she would send if war assailed, and would
bring through the air to my succour armour from Vulcan's hands. . . . Ah,
what slaughter awaits the wretched Laurentines! what a price, O Turnus,
wilt thou pay me! how many shields and helmets and brave bodies of men
shalt thou, [540-573] Lord Tiber, roll under thy waves! Let them call
for armed array and break the league!'



These words uttered, he rises from the high seat, and first wakes with
fresh fire the slumbering altars of Hercules, and gladly draws nigh his
tutelar god of yesternight and the small deities of the household. Alike
Evander, and alike the men of Troy, offer up, as is right, choice sheep
of two years old. Thereafter he goes to the ships and revisits his crew,
of whose company he chooses the foremost in valour to attend him to war;
the rest glide down the water and float idly with the descending stream,
to come with news to Ascanius of his father's state. They give horses to
the Teucrians who seek the fields of Tyrrhenia; a chosen one is brought
for Aeneas, housed in a tawny lion skin that glitters with claws of
gold. Rumour flies suddenly, spreading over the little town, that they
ride in haste to the courts of the Tyrrhene king. Mothers redouble their
prayers in terror, as fear treads closer on peril and the likeness of
the War God looms larger in sight. Then Evander, clasping the hand of
his departing son, clings to him weeping inconsolably, and speaks thus:



'Oh, if Jupiter would restore me the years that are past, as I was when,
close under Praeneste, I cut down their foremost ranks and burned the
piled shields of the conquered! Then this right hand sent King Erulus
down to hell, though to him at his birth his mother Feronia (awful to
tell) had given three lives and triple arms to wield; thrice must he be
laid low in death; yet then this hand took all his lives and as often
stripped him of his arms. Never should I now, O son, be severed from thy
dear embrace; never had the insolent sword of Mezentius on my borders
dealt so many cruel deaths, widowed the city of so many citizens. But
you, O heavenly powers, and thou, Jupiter, Lord and Governor of Heaven,
have compassion, I pray, on [574-609] the Arcadian king, and hear a
father's prayers. If your deity and decrees keep my Pallas safe for me,
if I live that I may see him and meet him yet, I pray for life; any toil
soever I have patience to endure. But if, O Fortune, thou threatenest
some dread calamity, now, ah now, may I break off a cruel life, while
anxiety still wavers and expectation is in doubt, while thou, dear boy,
my one last delight, art yet clasped in my embrace; let no bitterer
message wound mine ear.' These words the father poured forth at the
final parting; his servants bore him swooning within.



And now the cavalry had issued from the open gates, Aeneas and trusty
Achates among the foremost, then other of the Trojan princes, Pallas
conspicuous amid the column in scarf and inlaid armour; like the Morning
Star, when, newly washed in the ocean wave, he shews his holy face in
heaven, and melts the darkness away. Fearful mothers stand on the walls
and follow with their eyes the cloud of dust and the squadrons gleaming
in brass. They, where the goal of their way lies nearest, bear through
the brushwood in armed array. Forming in column, they advance noisily,
and the horse hoof shakes the crumbling plain with four-footed
trampling. There is a high grove by the cold river of Caere, widely
revered in ancestral awe; sheltering hills shut it in all about and
girdle the woodland with their dark firs. Rumour is that the old
Pelasgians, who once long ago held the Latin borders, consecrated the
grove and its festal day to Silvanus, god of the tilth and flock. Not
far from it Tarchon and his Tyrrhenians were encamped in a protected
place; and now from the hill-top the tents of all their army might be
seen outspread on the fields. Lord Aeneas and his chosen warriors draw
hither and refresh their weary horses and limbs.



But Venus the white goddess drew nigh, bearing her gifts through the
clouds of heaven; and when she saw her [610-646] son withdrawn far apart
in the valley's recess by the cold river, cast herself in his way, and
addressed him thus: 'Behold perfected the presents of my husband's
promised craftsmanship: so shalt thou not shun, O my child, soon to
challenge the haughty Laurentines or fiery Turnus to battle.' The
Cytherean spoke, and sought her son's embrace, and laid the armour
glittering under an oak over against him. He, rejoicing in the
magnificence of the goddess' gift, cannot have his fill of turning his
eyes over it piece by piece, and admires and handles between his arms
the helmet, dread with plumes and spouting flame, as when a blue cloud
takes fire in the sunbeams and gleams afar; then the smooth greaves of
electrum and refined gold, the spear, and the shield's ineffable design.
There the Lord of Fire had fashioned the story of Italy and the triumphs
of the Romans, not witless of prophecy or ignorant of the age to be;
there all the race of Ascanius' future seed, and their wars fought one
by one. Likewise had he fashioned the she-wolf couched after the birth
in the green cave of Mars; round her teats the twin boys hung playing,
and fearlessly mouthed their foster-mother; she, with round neck bent
back, stroked them by turns and shaped their bodies with her tongue.
Thereto not far from this he had set Rome and the lawless rape of the
Sabines in the concourse of the theatre when the great Circensian games
were celebrated, and a fresh war suddenly arising between the people of
Romulus and aged Tatius and austere Cures. Next these same kings laid
down their mutual strife and stood armed before Jove's altar with cup in
hand, and joined treaty over a slain sow. Not far from there four-horse
chariots driven apart had torn Mettus asunder (but thou, O Alban,
shouldst have kept by thy words!), and Tullus tore the flesh of the liar
through the forest, his splashed blood dripping from the briars.
Therewithal Porsena commanded [647-681] to admit the exiled Tarquin, and
held the city in the grasp of a strong blockade; the Aeneadae rushed on
the sword for liberty. Him thou couldst espy like one who chafes and
like one who threatens, because Cocles dared to tear down the bridge,
and Cloelia broke her bonds and swam the river. Highest of all Manlius,
warder of the Tarpeian fortress, stood with the temple behind him and
held the high Capitoline; and the thatch of Romulus' palace stood rough
and fresh. And here the silver goose, fluttering in the gilded
colonnades, cried that the Gauls were there on the threshold. The Gauls
were there among the brushwood, hard on the fortress, secure in the
darkness and the dower of shadowy night. Their clustering locks are of
gold, and of gold their attire; their striped cloaks glitter, and their
milk-white necks are entwined with gold. Two Alpine pikes sparkle in the
hand of each, and long shields guard their bodies. Here he had embossed
the dancing Salii and the naked Luperci, the crests wreathed in wool,
and the sacred shields that fell from heaven; in cushioned cars the
virtuous matrons led on their rites through the city. Far hence he adds
the habitations of hell also, the high gates of Dis and the dooms of
guilt; and thee, O Catiline, clinging on the beetling rock, and
shuddering at the faces of the Furies; and far apart the good, and Cato
delivering them statutes. Amidst it all flows wide the likeness of the
swelling sea, wrought in gold, though the foam surged gray upon blue
water; and round about dolphins, in shining silver, swept the seas with
their tails in circle as they cleft the tide. In the centre were visible
the brazen war-fleets of Actium; thou mightest see all Leucate swarm in
embattled array, and the waves gleam with gold. Here Caesar Augustus,
leading Italy to battle with Fathers and People, with gods of household
and of state, stands on the lofty stern; prosperous flames jet round his
brow, and his [682-715] ancestral star dawns overhead. Elsewhere
Agrippa, with favouring winds and gods, proudly leads on his column; on
his brows glitters the prow-girt naval crown, the haughty emblazonment
of the war. Here Antonius with barbarian aid and motley arms, from the
conquered nations of the Dawn and the shore of the southern sea, carries
with him Egypt and the Eastern forces of utmost Bactra, and the shameful
Egyptian woman goes as his consort. All at once rush on, and the whole
ocean is torn into foam by straining oars and triple-pointed prows. They
steer to sea; one might think that the Cyclades were uptorn and floated
on the main, or that lofty mountains clashed with mountains, so mightily
do their crews urge on the turreted ships. Flaming tow and the winged
steel of darts shower thickly from their hands; the fields of ocean
redden with fresh slaughter. Midmost the Queen calls on her squadron
with the timbrel of her country, nor yet casts back a glance on the twin
snakes behind her. Howling Anubis, and gods monstrous and multitudinous,
level their arms against Neptune and Venus and against Minerva; Mars
rages amid the havoc, graven in iron, and the Fatal Sisters hang aloft,
and Discord strides rejoicing with garment rent, and Bellona attends her
with blood-stained scourge. Looking thereon, Actian Apollo above drew
his bow; with the terror of it all Egypt and India, every Arab and
Sabaean, turned back in flight. The Queen herself seemed to call the
winds and spread her sails, and even now let her sheets run slack. Her
the Lord of Fire had fashioned amid the carnage, wan with the shadow of
death, borne along by the waves and the north-west wind; and over
against her the vast bulk of mourning Nile, opening out his folds and
calling with all his raiment the conquered people into his blue lap and
the coverture of his streams. But Caesar rode into the city of Rome in
triple triumph, and dedicated his vowed [716-731] offering to the gods
to stand for ever, three hundred stately shrines all about the city. The
streets were loud with gladness and games and shouting. In all the
temples was a band of matrons, in all were altars, and before the altars
slain steers strewed the ground. Himself he sits on the snowy threshold
of Phoebus the bright, reviews the gifts of the nations and ranges them
on the haughty doors. The conquered tribes move in long line, diverse as
in tongue, so in fashion of dress and armour. Here Mulciber had designed
the Nomad race and the ungirt Africans, here the Leleges and Carians and
archer Gelonians. Euphrates went by now with smoother waves, and the
Morini utmost of men, and the hornèd Rhine, the untamed Dahae, and
Araxes chafing under his bridge.



These things he admires on the shield of Vulcan, his mother's gift, and
rejoicing in the portraiture of unknown history, lifts on his shoulder
the destined glories of his children.

=== AENEID BOOK 9 ===

THE SIEGE OF THE TROJAN CAMP 


And while thus things pass far in the distance, Juno daughter of Saturn
sent Iris down the sky to gallant Turnus, then haply seated in his
forefather Pilumnus' holy forest dell. To him the child of Thaumas spoke
thus with roseate lips:



'Turnus, what no god had dared promise to thy prayer, behold, is brought
unasked by the circling day. Aeneas hath quitted town and comrades and
fleet to seek Evander's throne and Palatine dwelling-place. Nor is it
enough; he hath pierced to Corythus' utmost cities, and is mustering in
arms a troop of Lydian rustics. Why hesitate? now, now is the time to
call for chariot and horses. Break through all hindrance and seize the
bewildered camp.'



She spoke, and rose into the sky on poised wings, and flashed under the
clouds in a long flying bow. He knew her, and lifting either hand to
heaven, with this cry pursued her flight: 'Iris, grace of the sky, who
hath driven thee down the clouds to me and borne thee to earth? Whence
is this sudden sheen of weather? I see the sky parting asunder, and the
wandering stars in the firmament. I follow the high omen, whoso thou art
that callest me to arms.' And with these words he drew nigh the wave,
and [23-58] caught up water from its brimming eddy, making many prayers
to the gods and burdening the air with vows.



And now all the army was advancing on the open plain, rich in horses,
rich in raiment of broidered gold. Messapus rules the foremost ranks,
the sons of Tyrrheus the rear. Turnus commands the centre: even as
Ganges rising high in silence when his seven streams are still, or the
rich flood of Nile when he ebbs from the plains, and is now sunk into
his channel. On this the Teucrians descry a sudden cloud of dark dust
gathering, and the blackness rising on the plain. Caïcus raises a cry
from the mound in front: 'What mass of misty gloom, O citizens, is
rolling hitherward? to arms in haste! serve out weapons, climb the
walls. The enemy approaches, ho!' With mighty clamour the Teucrians pour
in through all the gates and fill the works. For so at his departure
Aeneas the great captain had enjoined; were aught to chance meanwhile,
they should not venture to range their line or trust the plain, but keep
their camp and the safety of the entrenched walls. So, though shame and
wrath beckon them on to battle, they yet bar the gates and do his
bidding, and await the foe armed and in shelter of the towers. Turnus,
who had flown forward in advance of his tardy column, comes up suddenly
to the town with a train of twenty chosen cavalry, borne on a Thracian
horse dappled with white, and covered by a golden helmet with scarlet
plume. 'Who will be with me, my men, to be first on the foe? See!' he
cries; and sends a javelin spinning into the air to open battle, and
advances towering on the plain. His comrades take up the cry, and follow
with dreadful din, wondering at the Teucrians' coward hearts, that they
issue not on even field nor face them in arms, but keep in shelter of
the camp. Hither and thither he rides furiously, tracing the walls, and
seeking entrance where way is none. And as a wolf prowling [59-92] about
some crowded sheepfold, when, beaten sore of winds and rains, he howls
at the pens by midnight; safe beneath their mothers the lambs keep
bleating on; he, savage and insatiate, rages in anger against the flock
he cannot reach, tired by the long-gathering madness for food, and the
throat unslaked with blood: even so the Rutulian, as he gazes on the
walled camp, kindles in anger, and indignation is hot in his iron frame.
By what means may he essay entrance? by what passage hurl the imprisoned
Trojans from the rampart and fling them on the plain? Close under the
flanking camp lay the fleet, fenced about with mounds and the waters of
the river; it he attacks, and calls for fire to his exultant comrades,
and eagerly catches a blazing pine-torch in his hand. Then indeed they
press on, quickened by Turnus' presence, and all the band arm them with
black faggots. The hearth-fires are plundered; the smoky brand trails a
resinous glare, and the Fire-god sends clouds of glowing ashes upward.



What god, O Muses, guarded the Trojans from the rage of the fire? who
repelled the fierce flame from their ships? Tell it; ancient is the
assurance thereof, but the fame everlasting. What time Aeneas began to
shape his fleet on Phrygian Ida, and prepared to seek the high seas, the
Berecyntian, they say, the very Mother of gods, spoke to high Jove in
these words: 'Grant, O son, to my prayer, what her dearness claims who
bore thee and laid Olympus under thy feet. My pine forest beloved of me
these many years, my grove was on the mountain's crown, whither men bore
my holy things, dim with dusky pine and pillared maples. These, when he
required a fleet, I gave gladly to the Dardanian; now fear wrings me
with sharp distress. Relieve my terrors, and grant a mother's prayers
such power that they may yield to no stress of voyaging or of stormy
gust: be birth on our hills their avail.'




[93-126] Thus her son in answer, who wheels the starry worlds: 'O
mother, whither callest thou fate? or what dost thou seek for these of
thine? May hulls have the right of immortality that were fashioned by
mortal hand? and may Aeneas traverse perils secure in insecurity? To
what god is power so great given? Nay, but when, their duty done, they
shall lie at last in their Ausonian haven, from all that have outgone
the waves and borne their Dardanian captain to the fields of Laurentum,
will I take their mortal body, and bid them be goddesses of the mighty
deep, even as Doto the Nereïd and Galatea, when they cut the sea that
falls away from their breasts in foam.' He ended; and by his brother's
Stygian streams, by the banks of the pitchy black-boiling chasm he
nodded confirmation, and shook all Olympus with his nod.



So the promised day was come, and the destinies had fulfilled their due
time, when Turnus' injury stirred the Mother to ward the brands from her
holy ships. First then a strange light flashed on all eyes, and a great
glory from the Dawn seemed to dart over the sky, with the choirs of Ida;
then an awful voice fell through air, filling the Trojan and Rutulian
ranks: 'Disquiet not yourselves, O Teucrians, to guard ships of mine,
neither arm your hands: sooner shall Turnus burn the seas than these
holy pines. You, go free; go, goddesses of the sea; the Mother bids it.'
And immediately each ship breaks the bond that held it, as with dipping
prows they plunge like dolphins deep into the water: from it again (O
wonderful and strange!) they rise with maidens' faces in like number,
and bear out to sea.



The Rutulians stood dumb: Messapus himself is terror-stricken among his
disordered cavalry; even the stream of Tiber pauses with hoarse murmur,
and recoils from sea. But bold Turnus fails not a whit in confidence;
nay, he [127-158] raises their courage with words, nay, he chides them:
'On the Trojans are these portents aimed; Jupiter himself hath bereft
them of their wonted succour; nor do they abide Rutulian sword and fire.
So are the seas pathless for the Teucrians, nor is there any hope in
flight; they have lost half their world. And we hold the land: in all
their thousands the nations of Italy are under arms. In no wise am I
dismayed by those divine oracles of doom the Phrygians insolently
advance. Fate and Venus are satisfied, in that the Trojans have touched
our fruitful Ausonian fields. I too have my fate in reply to theirs, to
put utterly to the sword the guilty nation who have robbed me of my
bride; not the sons of Atreus alone are touched by that pain, nor may
Mycenae only rise in arms. But to have perished once is enough! To have
sinned once should have been enough, in all but utter hatred of the
whole of womankind. Trust in the sundering rampart, and the hindrance of
their trenches, so little between them and death, gives these their
courage: yet have they not seen Troy town, the work of Neptune's hand,
sink into fire? But you, my chosen, who of you makes ready to breach
their palisade at the sword's point, and join my attack on their
fluttered camp? I have no need of Vulcanian arms, of a thousand ships,
to meet the Teucrians. All Etruria may join on with them in alliance:
nor let them fear the darkness, and the cowardly theft of their
Palladium, and the guards cut down on the fortress height. Nor will we
hide ourselves unseen in a horse's belly; in daylight and unconcealed
are we resolved to girdle their walls with flame. Not with Grecians will
I make them think they have to do, nor a Pelasgic force kept off till
the tenth year by Hector. Now, since the better part of day is spent,
for what remains refresh your bodies, glad that we have done so well,
and expect the order of battle.'




[159-192] Meanwhile charge is given to Messapus to blockade the gates
with pickets of sentries, and encircle the works with watchfires. Twice
seven are chosen to guard the walls with Rutulian soldiery; but each
leads an hundred men, crimson-plumed and sparkling in gold. They spread
themselves about and keep alternate watch, and, lying along the grass,
drink deep and set brazen bowls atilt. The fires glow, and the sentinels
spend the night awake in games. . . .



Down on this the Trojans look forth from the rampart, as they hold the
height in arms; withal in fearful haste they try the gates and lay
gangways from bastion to bastion, and bring up missiles. Mnestheus and
valiant Serestus speed the work, whom lord Aeneas appointed, should
misfortune call, to be rulers of the people and governors of the state.
All their battalions, sharing the lot of peril, keep watch along the
walls, and take alternate charge of all that requires defence.



On guard at the gate was Nisus son of Hyrtacus, most valiant in arms,
whom Ida the huntress had sent in Aeneas' company with fleet javelin and
light arrows; and by his side Euryalus, fairest of all the Aeneadae and
the wearers of Trojan arms, showing on his unshaven boy's face the first
bloom of youth. These two were one in affection, and charged in battle
together; now likewise their common guard kept the gate. Nisus cries:
'Lend the gods this fervour to the soul, Euryalus? or does fatal passion
become a proper god to each? Long ere now my soul is restless to begin
some great deed of arms, and quiet peace delights it not. Thou seest how
confident in fortune the Rutulians stand. Their lights glimmer far
apart; buried in drunken sleep they have sunk to rest; silence stretches
all about. Learn then what doubt, what purpose, now rises in my spirit.
People and senate, they all cry that Aeneas [193-226] be summoned, and
men be sent to carry him tidings. If they promise what I ask in thy
name—for to me the glory of the deed is enough—methinks I can find
beneath yonder hillock a path to the walls of Pallanteum town.'



Euryalus stood fixed, struck through with high ambition, and therewith
speaks thus to his fervid friend: 'Dost thou shun me then, Nisus, to
share thy company in highest deeds? shall I send thee alone into so
great perils? Not thus did my warrior father Opheltes rear and nurture
me amid the Argive terror and the agony of Troy, nor thus have I borne
myself by thy side while following noble Aeneas to his utmost fate. Here
is a spirit, yes here, that scorns the light of day, that deems lightly
bought at a life's price that honour to which thou dost aspire.'



To this Nisus: 'Assuredly I had no such fear of thee; no, nor could I;
so may great Jupiter, or whoso looks on earth with equal eyes, restore
me to thee triumphant. But if haply—as thou seest often and often in so
forlorn a hope—if haply chance or deity sweep me to adverse doom, I
would have thee survive; thine age is worthier to live. Be there one to
commit me duly to earth, rescued or ransomed from the battlefield: or,
if fortune deny that, to pay me far away the rites of funeral and the
grace of a tomb. Neither would I bring such pain on thy poor mother, she
who singly of many matrons hath dared to follow her boy to the end, and
slights great Acestes' city.'



And he: 'In vain dost thou string idle reasons; nor does my purpose
yield or change its place so soon. Let us make haste.' He speaks, and
rouses the watch; they come up, and relieve the guard; quitting their
post, he and Nisus stride on to seek the prince.



The rest of living things over all lands were soothing their cares in
sleep, and their hearts forgot their pain; the foremost Trojan captains,
a chosen band, held council [227-261] of state upon the kingdom; what
should they do, or who would now be their messenger to Aeneas? They
stand, leaning on their long spears and grasping their shields, in mid
level of the camp. Then Nisus and Euryalus together pray with quick
urgency to be given audience; their matter is weighty and will be worth
the delay. Iülus at once heard their hurried plea, and bade Nisus speak.
Thereon the son of Hyrtacus: 'Hear, O people of Aeneas, with favourable
mind, nor regard our years in what we offer. Sunk in sleep and wine, the
Rutulians are silent; we have stealthily spied the open ground that lies
in the path through the gate next the sea. The line of fires is broken,
and their smoke rises darkly upwards. If you allow us to use the chance
towards seeking Aeneas in Pallanteum town, you will soon descry us here
at hand with the spoils of the great slaughter we have dealt. Nor shall
we miss the way we go; up the dim valleys we have seen the skirts of the
town, and learned all the river in continual hunting.'



Thereon aged Aletes, sage in counsel: 'Gods of our fathers, under whose
deity Troy ever stands, not wholly yet do you purpose to blot out the
Trojan race, when you have brought us young honour and hearts so sure as
this.' So speaking, he caught both by shoulder and hand, with tears
showering down over face and feature. 'What guerdon shall I deem may be
given you, O men, what recompense for these noble deeds? First and
fairest shall be your reward from the gods and your own conduct; and
Aeneas the good shall speedily repay the rest, and Ascanius' fresh youth
never forget so great a service.'—'Nay,' breaks in Ascanius, 'I whose
sole safety is in my father's return, I adjure thee and him, O Nisus, by
our great household gods, by the tutelar spirit of Assaracus and hoar
Vesta's sanctuary—on your knees I lay all my fortune and trust—recall
my father; [262-296] give him back to sight; all sorrow disappears in
his recovery. I will give a pair of cups my father took in vanquished
Arisba, wrought in silver and rough with tracery, twin tripods, and two
large talents of gold, and an ancient bowl of Sidonian Dido's giving. If
it be indeed our lot to possess Italy and grasp a conquering sceptre,
and to assign the spoil; thou sawest the horse and armour of Turnus as
he went all in gold; that same horse, the shield and the ruddy plume,
will I reserve from partition, thy reward, O Nisus, even from now. My
father will give besides twelve mothers of the choicest beauty, and men
captives, all in their due array; above these, the space of meadow-land
that is now King Latinus' own domain. Thee, O noble boy, whom mine age
follows at a nearer interval, even now I welcome to all my heart, and
embrace as my companion in every fortune. No glory shall be sought for
my state without thee; whether peace or war be in conduct, my chiefest
trust for deed and word shall be in thee.'



Answering whom Euryalus speaks thus: 'Let but the day never come to
prove me degenerate from this daring valour; fortune may fall prosperous
or adverse. But above all thy gifts, one thing I ask of thee. My poor
mother of Priam's ancient race, whom neither the Ilian land nor King
Acestes' city kept from following me forth, her I now leave in ignorance
of this danger, such as it is, and without a farewell, because—night
and thine hand be witness!—I cannot bear a parent's tears. But thou, I
pray, support her want and relieve her loneliness. Let me take with me
this hope in thee, I shall go more daringly to every fortune.' Deeply
stirred at heart, the Dardanians shed tears, fair Iülus before them all,
as the likeness of his own father's love wrung his soul. Then he speaks
thus: . . . 'Assure thyself all that is due to thy mighty enterprise;
[297-330] for she shall be a mother to me, and only in name fail to be
Creüsa; nor slight is the honour reserved for the mother of such a son.
What chance soever follow this deed, I swear by this head whereby my
father was wont to swear, what I promise to thee on thy prosperous
return shall abide the same for thy mother and kindred.' So speaks he
weeping, and ungirds from his shoulder the sword inlaid with gold,
fashioned with marvellous skill by Lycaon of Gnosus and fitly set in a
sheath of ivory. Mnestheus gives Nisus the shaggy spoils of a lion's
hide; faithful Aletes exchanges his helmet. They advance onward in arms,
and as they go all the company of captains, young and old, speed them to
the gates with vows. Likewise fair Iülus, with a man's thought and a
spirit beyond his years, gave many messages to be carried to his father.
But the breezes shred all asunder and give them unaccomplished to the
clouds.



They issue and cross the trenches, and through the shadow of night seek
the fatal camp, themselves first to be the death of many a man. All
about they see bodies strewn along the grass in drunken sleep, chariots
atilt on the shore, the men lying among their traces and wheels, with
their armour by them, and their wine. The son of Hyrtacus began thus:
'Euryalus, now for daring hands; all invites them; here lies our way;
see thou that none raise a hand from behind against us, and keep
far-sighted watch. Here will I deal desolation, and make a broad path
for thee to follow.' So speaks he and checks his voice; therewith he
drives his sword at lordly Rhamnes, who haply on carpets heaped high was
drawing the full breath of sleep; a king himself, and King Turnus'
best-beloved augur, but not all his augury could avert his doom. Three
of his household beside him, lying carelessly among their arms, and the
armour-bearer and charioteer of Remus go [331-364] down before him,
caught at the horses' feet. Their drooping necks he severs with the
sword, then beheads their lord likewise and leaves the trunk spouting
blood; the dark warm gore soaks ground and cushions. Therewithal Lamyrus
and Lamus, and beautiful young Serranus, who that night had played long
and late, and lay with the conquering god heavy on every limb; happy,
had he played out the night, and carried his game to day! Even thus an
unfed lion riots through full sheepfolds, for the madness of hunger
urges him, and champs and rends the fleecy flock that are dumb with
fear, and roars with blood-stained mouth. Nor less is the slaughter of
Euryalus; he too rages all aflame; an unnamed multitude go down before
his path, and Fadus and Herbesus and Rhoetus and Abaris, unaware;
Rhoetus awake and seeing all, but he hid in fear behind a great bowl;
right in whose breast, as he rose close by, he plunged the sword all its
length, and drew it back heavy with death. He vomits forth the crimson
life-blood, and throws up wine mixed with blood in the death agony. The
other presses hotly on his stealthy errand, and now bent his way towards
Messapus' comrades, where he saw the last flicker of the fires go down,
and the horses tethered in order cropping the grass; when Nisus briefly
speaks thus, for he saw him carried away by excess of murderous desire;
'Let us stop; for unfriendly daylight draws nigh. Vengeance is sated to
the full; a path is cut through the enemy.' Much they leave behind,
men's armour wrought in solid silver, and bowls therewith, and beautiful
carpets. Euryalus tears away the decorations of Rhamnes and his
sword-belt embossed with gold, a gift which Caedicus, wealthiest of men
of old, sends to Remulus of Tibur when plighting friendship far away; he
on his death-bed gives them to his grandson for his own; after his death
the Rutulians captured them as spoil of war; these he fits on the
shoulders valiant [365-396] in vain, then puts on Messapus' light helmet
with its graceful plumes. They issue from the camp and make for safety.



Meanwhile an advanced guard of cavalry were on their way from the Latin
city, while the rest of their marshalled battalions linger on the
plains, and bore a reply to King Turnus; three hundred men all under
shield, in Volscens' leading. And now they approached the camp and drew
near the wall, when they descry the two turning away by the pathway to
the left; and in the glimmering darkness of night the forgotten helmet
betrayed Euryalus, glittering as it met the light. It seemed no thing of
chance. Volscens cries aloud from his column: 'Stand, men! why on the
march, or how are you in arms? or whither hold you your way?' They offer
nothing in reply, but quicken their flight into the forest, and throw
themselves on the night. On this side and that the horsemen bar the
familiar crossways, and encircle every outlet with sentinels. The forest
spread wide in tangled thickets and dark ilex; thick growth of briars
choked it all about, and the muffled pathway glimmered in a broken
track. Hampered by the shadowy boughs and his cumbrous spoil, Euryalus
in his fright misses the line of way. Nisus gets clear; and now
unthinkingly he had passed the enemy, and the place afterwards called
Albani from Alba's name; then the deep coverts were of King Latinus'
domain; when he stopped, and looked back in vain for his lost friend.
'Euryalus, unhappy! on what ground have I left thee? or where shall I
follow, again unwinding all the entanglement of the treacherous woodland
way?' Therewith he marks and retraces his footsteps, and wanders down
the silent thickets. He hears the horses, hears the clatter and
signal-notes of the pursuers. Nor had he long to wait, when shouts reach
his ears, and he sees Euryalus, whom even now, in the perplexity of
ground and [397-431] darkness, the whole squadron have borne down in a
sudden rush, and seize in spite of all his vain struggles. What shall he
do? with what force, what arms dare his rescue? or shall he rush on his
doom amid their swords, and find in their wounds a speedy and glorious
death? Quickly he draws back his arm with poised spear, and looking up
to the moon on high, utters this prayer: 'Do thou give present aid to
our enterprise, O Latonian goddess, glory of the stars and guardian of
the woodlands: by all the gifts my father Hyrtacus ever bore for my sake
to thine altars, by all mine own hand hath added from my hunting, or
hung in thy dome, or fixed on thy holy roof, grant me to confound these
masses, and guide my javelin through the air.' He ended, and with all
the force of his body hurls the steel. The flying spear whistles through
the darkness of the night, and comes full on the shield of Sulmo, and
there snaps, and the broken shaft passes on through his heart. Spouting
a warm tide from his breast he rolls over chill in death, and his sides
throb with long-drawn gasps. Hither and thither they gaze round. Lo, he
all the fiercer was poising another weapon high by his ear; while they
hesitate, the spear went whizzing through both Tagus' temples, and
pierced and stuck fast in the warm brain. Volscens is mad with rage, and
nowhere espies the sender of the weapon, nor where to direct his fury.
'Yet meanwhile thy warm blood shalt pay me vengeance for both,' he
cries; and unsheathing his sword, he made at Euryalus. Then indeed
frantic with terror Nisus shrieks out; no longer could he shroud himself
in darkness or endure such agony. 'On me, on me, I am here, I did it, on
me turn your steel, O Rutulians! Mine is all the guilt; he dared not,
no, nor could not; to this heaven I appeal and the stars that know; he
only loved his hapless friend too well.' Such words he was uttering; but
the sword driven hard home is gone [432-464] clean through his ribs and
pierces the white breast. Euryalus rolls over in death, and the blood
runs over his lovely limbs, and his neck sinks and settles on his
shoulder; even as when a lustrous flower cut away by the plough droops
in death, or weary-necked poppies bow down their head if overweighted
with a random shower. But Nisus rushes amidst them, and alone among them
all makes at Volscens, keeps to Volscens alone: round him the foe
cluster, and on this side and that hurl him back: none the less he
presses on, and whirls his sword like lightning, till he plunges it full
in the face of the shrieking Rutulian, and slays his enemy as he dies.
Then, stabbed through and through, he flung himself above his lifeless
friend, and there at last found the quiet sleep of death.



Happy pair! if my verse is aught of avail, no length of days shall ever
blot you from the memory of time, while the house of Aeneas shall dwell
by the Capitoline's stedfast stone, and the lord of Rome hold
sovereignty.



The victorious Rutulians, with their spoils and the plunder regained,
bore dead Volscens weeping to the camp. Nor in the camp was the wailing
less, when Rhamnes was found a bloodless corpse, and Serranus and Numa
and all their princes destroyed in a single slaughter. Crowds throng
towards the corpses and the men wounded to death, the ground fresh with
warm slaughter and the swoln runlets of frothing blood. They mutually
recognise the spoils, Messapus' shining helmet and the decorations that
cost such sweat to win back.



And now Dawn, leaving the saffron bed of Tithonus, scattered over earth
her fresh shafts of early light; now the sunlight streams in, now
daylight unveils the world. Turnus, himself fully armed, awakes his men
to arms, and each leader marshals to battle his brazen lines and whets
their ardour with varying rumours. Nay, pitiable sight! they
[465-499] fix on spear-points and uprear and follow with loud shouts the
heads of Euryalus and Nisus. . . . The Aeneadae stubbornly face them,
lining the left hand wall (for their right is girdled by the river),
hold the deep trenches and stand gloomily on the high towers, stirred
withal by the faces they know, alas, too well, in their dark dripping
gore. Meanwhile Rumour on fluttering wings rushes with the news through
the alarmed town and glides to the ears of Euryalus' mother. But
instantly the warmth leaves her woeful body, the shuttle starts from her
hand and the threads unroll. She darts forth in agony, and with woman's
wailing and torn hair runs distractedly towards the walls and the
foremost columns, recking naught of men, naught of peril or weapons;
thereon she fills the air with her complaint: 'Is it thus I behold thee,
O Euryalus? Couldst thou, the latest solace of mine age, leave me alone
so cruelly? nor when sent into such danger was one last word of thee
allowed thine unhappy mother? Alas, thou liest in a strange land, given
for a prey to the dogs and fowls of Latium! nor was I, thy mother, there
for chief mourner, to lay thee out or close thine eyes or wash thy
wounds, and cover thee with the garment I hastened on for thee whole
nights and days, an anxious old woman taking comfort from the loom.
Whither shall I follow? or what land now holds thy mangled corpse, thy
body torn limb from limb? Is this all of what thou wert that returns to
me, O my son? is it this I have followed by land and sea? Strike me
through of your pity, on me cast all your weapons, Rutulians; make me
the first sacrifice of your steel. Or do thou, mighty lord of heaven, be
merciful, and with thine own weapon hurl this hateful life to the nether
deep, since in no wise else may I break away from life's cruelty.' At
this weeping cry their courage falters, and a sigh of sorrow passes all
along; their strength is benumbed and broken for battle. Her, while
[500-535] her grief kindled, at Ilioneus' and weeping Iülus' bidding
Idaeus and Actor catch up and carry home in their arms.



But the terrible trumpet-note afar rang on the shrill brass; a shout
follows, and is echoed from the sky. The Volscians hasten up in even
line under their advancing roof of shields, and set to fill up the
trenches and tear down the palisades. Some seek entrance by scaling the
walls with ladders, where the defenders' battle-line is thin, and light
shows through gaps in the ring of men. The Teucrians in return shower
weapons of every sort, and push them down with stiff poles, practised by
long warfare in their ramparts' defence: and fiercely hurl heavy stones,
so be they may break the shielded line; while they, crowded under their
shell, lightly bear all the downpour. But now they fail; for where the
vast mass presses close, the Teucrians roll a huge block tumbling down
that makes a wide gap in the Rutulians and crashes through their
armour-plating. Nor do the bold Rutulians care longer to continue the
blind fight, but strive to clear the rampart with missiles. . . . Elsewhere
in dreadful guise Mezentius brandishes his Etruscan pine and hurls
smoking brands; but Messapus, tamer of horses, seed of Neptune, tears
away the palisading and calls for ladders to the ramparts.



Thy sisterhood, O Calliope, I pray inspire me while I sing the
destruction spread then and there by Turnus' sword, the deaths dealt
from his hand, and whom each warrior sent down to the under world; and
unroll with me the broad borders of war.



A tower loomed vast with lofty gangways at a point of vantage; this all
the Italians strove with main strength to storm, and set all their might
and device to overthrow it; the Trojans in return defended it with
stones and hurled showers of darts through the loopholes. Turnus,
leading the attack, threw a blazing torch that caught flaming on the
[536-570] side wall; swoln by the wind, the flame seized the planking
and clung devouring to the standards. Those within, in hurry and
confusion, desire retreat from their distress; in vain; while they
cluster together and fall back to the side free from the destroyer, the
tower sinks prone under the sudden weight with a crash that thunders
through all the sky. Pierced by their own weapons, and impaled on hard
splinters of wood, they come half slain to the ground with the vast mass
behind them. Scarcely do Helenor alone and Lycus struggle out; Helenor
in his early prime, whom a slave woman of Licymnos bore in secret to the
Maeonian king, and sent to Troy in forbidden weapons, lightly armed with
sheathless sword and white unemblazoned shield. And he, when he saw
himself among Turnus' encircling thousands, ranks on this side and ranks
on this of Latins, as a wild beast which, girt with a crowded ring of
hunters, dashes at their weapons, hurls herself unblinded on death, and
comes with a bound upon the spears; even so he rushes to his death amid
the enemy, and presses on where he sees their weapons thickest. But
Lycus, far fleeter of foot, holds by the walls in flight midway among
foes and arms, and strives to catch the coping in his grasp and reach
the hands of his comrades. And Turnus pursuing and aiming as he ran,
thus upbraids him in triumph: 'Didst thou hope, madman, thou mightest
escape our hands?' and catches him as he clings, and tears him and a
great piece of the wall away: as when, with a hare or snowy-bodied swan
in his crooked talons, Jove's armour-bearer soars aloft, or the wolf of
Mars snatches from the folds some lamb sought of his mother with
incessant bleating. On all sides a shout goes up. They advance and fill
the trenches with heaps of earth; some toss glowing brands on the roofs.
Ilioneus strikes down Lucetius with a great fragment of mountain rock
as, carrying fire, he draws [571-606] nigh the gate. Liger slays
Emathion, Asylas Corinaeus, the one skilled with the javelin, the other
with the stealthy arrow from afar. Caeneus slays Ortygius; Turnus
victorious Caeneus; Turnus Itys and Clonius, Dioxippus, and Promolus,
and Sagaris, and Idas where he stood in front of the turret top; Capys
Privernus: him Themillas' spear had first grazed lightly; the madman
threw down his shield to carry his hand to the wound; so the arrow
winged her way, and pinning his hand to his left side, broke into the
lungs with deadly wound. The son of Arcens stood splendid in arms, and
scarf embroidered with needlework and bright with Iberian blue, the
beautiful boy sent by his father Arcens from nurture in the grove of our
Lady about the streams of Symaethus, where Palicus' altar is rich and
gracious. Laying down his spear, Mezentius whirled thrice round his head
the tightened cord of his whistling sling, pierced him full between the
temples with the molten bullet, and stretched him all his length upon
the sand.



Then, it is said, Ascanius first aimed his flying shaft in war, wont
before to frighten beasts of the chase, and struck down a brave
Numanian, Remulus by name, but lately allied in bridal to Turnus'
younger sister. He advancing before his ranks clamoured things fit and
unfit to tell, and strode along lofty and voluble, his heart lifted up
with his fresh royalty.



'Take you not shame to be again held leaguered in your ramparts, O
Phrygians twice taken, and to make walls your fence from death? Behold
them who demand in war our wives for theirs! What god, what madness,
hath driven you to Italy? Here are no sons of Atreus nor glozing
Ulysses. A race of hardy breed, we carry our newborn children to the
streams and harden them in the bitter icy water; as boys they spend
wakeful nights over the chase, and tire out the woodland; but in
manhood, [607-639] unwearied by toil and trained to poverty, they subdue
the soil with their mattocks, or shake towns in war. Every age wears
iron, and we goad the flanks of our oxen with reversed spear; nor does
creeping old age weaken our strength of spirit or abate our force. White
hairs bear the weight of the helmet; and it is ever our delight to drive
in fresh spoil and live on our plunder. Yours is embroidered raiment of
saffron and shining sea-purple. Indolence is your pleasure, your delight
the luxurious dance; you wear sleeved tunics and ribboned turbans. O
right Phrygian women, not even Phrygian men! traverse the heights of
Dindymus, where the double-mouthed flute breathes familiar music. The
drums call you, and the Berecyntian boxwood of the mother of Ida; leave
arms to men, and lay down the sword.'



As he flung forth such words of ill-ominous strain, Ascanius brooked it
not, and aimed an arrow on him from the stretched horse sinew; and as he
drew his arms asunder, first stayed to supplicate Jove in lowly vows:
'Jupiter omnipotent, deign to favour this daring deed. My hands shall
bear yearly gifts to thee in thy temple, and bring to stand before thine
altars a steer with gilded forehead, snow-white, carrying his head high
as his mother's, already pushing with his horn and making the sand fly
up under his feet.' The Father heard and from a clear space of sky
thundered on the left; at once the fated bow rings, the grim-whistling
arrow flies from the tense string, and goes through the head of Remulus,
the steel piercing through from temple to temple. 'Go, mock valour with
insolence of speech! Phrygians twice taken return this answer to
Rutulians.' Thus and no further Ascanius; the Teucrians respond in
cheers, and shout for joy in rising height of courage. Then haply in the
tract of heaven tressed Apollo sate looking down from his cloud on the
[640-673] Ausonian ranks and town, and thus addresses triumphant Iülus:
'Good speed to thy young valour, O boy! this is the way to heaven, child
of gods and parent of gods to be! Rightly shall all wars fated to come
sink to peace beneath the line of Assaracus; nor art thou bounded in a
Troy.' So speaking, he darts from heaven's height, and cleaving the
breezy air, seeks Ascanius. Then he changes the fashion of his
countenance, and becomes aged Butes, armour-bearer of old to Dardanian
Anchises, and the faithful porter of his threshold; thereafter his lord
gave him for Ascanius' attendant. In all points like the old man Apollo
came, voice and colour, white hair, and grimly clashing arms, and speaks
these words to eager Iülus:



'Be it enough, son of Aeneas, that the Numanian hath fallen unavenged
beneath thine arrows; this first honour great Apollo allows thee, nor
envies the arms that match his own. Further, O boy, let war alone.' Thus
Apollo began, and yet speaking retreated from mortal view, vanishing
into thin air away out of their eyes. The Dardanian princes knew the god
and the arms of deity, and heard the clash of his quiver as he went. So
they restrain Ascanius' keenness for battle by the words of Phoebus'
will; themselves they again close in conflict, and cast their lives into
the perilous breach. Shouts run all along the battlemented walls;
ringing bows are drawn and javelin thongs twisted: all the ground is
strewn with missiles. Shields and hollow helmets ring to blows; the
battle swells fierce; heavy as the shower lashes the ground that sets in
when the Kids are rainy in the West; thick as hail pours down from
storm-clouds on the shallows, when the rough lord of the winds congeals
his watery deluge and breaks up the hollow vapours in the sky.



Pandarus and Bitias, sprung of Alcanor of Ida, whom woodland Iaera bore
in the grove of Jupiter, grown now [674-709] tall as their ancestral
pines and hills, fling open the gates barred by their captain's order,
and confident in arms, wilfully invite the enemy within the walls.
Themselves within they stand to right and left in front of the towers,
sheathed in iron, the plumes flickering over their stately heads: even
as high in air around the gliding streams, whether on Padus' banks or by
pleasant Athesis, twin oaks rise lifting their unshorn heads into the
sky with high tops asway. The Rutulians pour in when they see the
entrance open. Straightway Quercens and Aquicolus beautiful in arms, and
desperate Tmarus, and Haemon, seed of Mars, either gave back in rout
with all their columns, or in the very gateway laid down their life.
Then the spirits of the combatants swell in rising wrath, and now the
Trojans gather swarming to the spot, and dare to close hand to hand and
to sally farther out.



News is brought to Turnus the captain, as he rages afar among the routed
foe, that the enemy surges forth into fresh slaughter and flings wide
his gates. He breaks off unfinished, and, fired with immense anger,
rushes towards the haughty brethren at the Dardanian gate. And on
Antiphates first, for first he came, the bastard son of mighty Sarpedon
by a Theban mother, he hurls his javelin and strikes him down; the
Italian cornel flies through the yielding air, and, piercing the gullet,
runs deep into his breast; a frothing tide pours from the dark yawning
wound, and the steel grows warm where it pierces the lung. Then Meropes
and Erymas, then Aphidnus goes down before his hand; then Bitias,
fiery-eyed and exultant, not with a javelin; for not to a javelin had he
given his life; but the loud-whistling pike came hurled with a
thunderbolt's force; neither twofold bull's hide kept it back, nor the
trusty corslet's double scales of gold: his vast limbs sink in a heap;
earth utters a groan, and the great shield clashes [710-745] over him:
even as once and again on the Euboïc shore of Baiae falls a mass of
stone, built up of great blocks and so cast into the sea; thus does it
tumble prone, crashes into the shoal water and sinks deep to rest; the
seas are stirred, and the dark sand eddies up; therewith the depth of
Prochyta quivers at the sound, and the couchant rocks of Inarime, piled
above Typhoeus by Jove's commands.



On this Mars armipotent raised the spirit and strength of the Latins,
and goaded their hearts to rage, and sent Flight and dark Fear among the
Teucrians. From all quarters they gather, since battle is freely
offered; and the warrior god inspires. . . . Pandarus, at his brother's
fall, sees how fortune stands, what hap rules the day; and swinging the
gate round on its hinge with all his force, pushes it to with his broad
shoulders, leaving many of his own people shut outside the walls in the
desperate conflict, but shutting others in with him as they pour back in
retreat. Madman! who saw not the Rutulian prince burst in amid their
columns, and fairly shut him into the town, like a monstrous tiger among
the silly flocks. At once strange light flashed from his eyes, and his
armour rang terribly; the blood-red plumes flicker on his head, and
lightnings shoot sparkling from his shield. In sudden dismay the
Aeneadae know the hated form and giant limbs. Then tall Pandarus leaps
forward, in burning rage at his brother's death: 'This is not the palace
of Amata's dower,' he cries, 'nor does Ardea enclose Turnus in her
native walls. Thou seest a hostile camp; escape hence is hopeless.' To
him Turnus, smiling and cool: 'Begin with all thy valiance, and close
hand to hand; here too shalt thou tell that a Priam found his Achilles.'
He ended; the other, putting out all his strength, hurls his rough
spear, knotty and unpeeled. The breezes caught it; Juno, daughter of
Saturn, [746-780] made the wound glance off as it came, and the spear
sticks fast in the gate. 'But this weapon that my strong hand whirls,
this thou shalt not escape; for not such is he who sends weapon and
wound.' So speaks he, and rises high on his uplifted sword; the steel
severs the forehead midway right between the temples, and divides the
beardless cheeks with ghastly wound. He crashes down; earth shakes under
the vast weight; dying limbs and brain-spattered armour tumble in a heap
to the ground, and the head, evenly severed, dangles this way and that
from either shoulder. The Trojans scatter and turn in hasty terror; and
had the conqueror forthwith taken thought to burst the bars and let in
his comrades at the gate, that had been the last day of the war and of
the nation. But rage and mad thirst of slaughter drive him like fire on
the foe. . . . First he catches up Phalaris; then Gyges, and hamstrings
him; he plucks away their spears, and hurls them on the backs of the
flying crowd; Juno lends strength and courage. Halys he sends to join
them, and Phegeus, pierced right through the shield; then, as they
ignorantly raised their war-cry on the walls, Alcander and Halius,
Noëmon and Prytanis. Lynceus advanced to meet him, calling up his
comrades; from the rampart the glittering sword sweeps to the left and
catches him; struck off by the one downright blow, head and helmet lay
far away. Next Amycus fell, the deadly huntsman, incomparable in skill
of hand to anoint his arrows and arm their steel with venom; and Clytius
the Aeolid, and Cretheus beloved of the Muses, Cretheus of the Muses'
company, whose delight was ever in songs and harps and stringing of
verses; ever he sang of steeds and armed men and battles.



At last, hearing of the slaughter of their men, the Teucrian captains,
Mnestheus and gallant Serestus, come up, and see their comrades in
disordered flight and the foe [781-814] let in. And Mnestheus: 'Whither
next, whither press you in flight? what other walls, what farther city
have you yet? Shall one man, and he girt in on all sides,
fellow-citizens, by your entrenchments, thus unchecked deal devastation
throughout our city, and send all our best warriors to the under world?
Have you no pity, no shame, cowards, for your unhappy country, for your
ancient gods, for great Aeneas?'



Kindled by such words, they take heart and rally in dense array. Little
by little Turnus drew away from the fight towards the river, and the
side encircled by the stream: the more bravely the Teucrians press on
him with loud shouts and thickening masses, even as a band that fall on
a wrathful lion with levelled weapons, but he, frightened back, retires
surly and grim-glaring; and neither does wrath nor courage let him turn
his back, nor can he make head, for all that he desires it, against the
surrounding arms and men. Even thus Turnus draws lingeringly backward,
with unhastened steps, and soul boiling in anger. Nay, twice even then
did he charge amid the enemy, twice drove them in flying rout along the
walls. But all the force of the camp gathers hastily up; nor does Juno,
daughter of Saturn, dare to supply him strength to countervail; for
Jupiter sent Iris down through the aery sky, bearing stern orders to his
sister that Turnus shall withdraw from the high Trojan town. Therefore
neither with shield nor hand can he keep his ground, so overpoweringly
from all sides comes upon him the storm of weapons. About the hollows of
his temples the helmet rings with incessant clash, and the solid brass
is riven beneath the stones; the horsehair crest is rent away; the
shield-boss avails not under the blows; Mnestheus thunders on with his
Trojans, and pours in a storm of spears. All over him the sweat trickles
and pours in swart stream, and no breathing space is given; sick gasps
shake [815-818] his exhausted limbs. Then at last, with a headlong
bound, he leapt fully armed into the river; the river's yellow eddies
opened for him as he came, and the buoyant water brought him up, and,
washing away the slaughter, returned him triumphant to his comrades.

=== AENEID BOOK 10 ===

THE BATTLE ON THE BEACH 


Meanwhile the heavenly house omnipotent unfolds her doors, and the
father of gods and king of men calls a council in the starry dwelling;
whence he looks sheer down on the whole earth, the Dardanian camp, and
the peoples of Latium. They sit down within from doorway to doorway:
their lord begins:



'Lords of heaven, wherefore is your decree turned back, and your minds
thus jealously at strife? I forbade Italy to join battle with the
Teucrians; why this quarrel in face of my injunction? What terror hath
bidden one or another run after arms and tempt the sword? The due time
of battle will arrive, call it not forth, when furious Carthage shall
one day sunder the Alps to hurl ruin full on the towers of Rome. Then
hatred may grapple with hatred, then hostilities be opened; now let them
be, and cheerfully join in the treaty we ordain.'



Thus Jupiter in brief; but not briefly golden Venus returns in answer:
. . .



'O Lord, O everlasting Governor of men and things—for what else may we
yet supplicate?—beholdest thou how the Rutulians brave it, and Turnus,
borne charioted through the ranks, proudly sweeps down the tide of
battle? Bar [22-58] and bulwark no longer shelter the Trojans; nay,
within the gates and even on the mounded walls they clash in battle and
make the trenches swim with blood. Aeneas is away and ignorant. Wilt
thou never then let our leaguer be raised? Again a foe overhangs the
walls of infant Troy; and another army, and a second son of Tydeus rises
from Aetolian Arpi against the Trojans. Truly I think my wounds are yet
to come, and I thy child am keeping some mortal weapons idle. If the
Trojans steered for Italy without thy leave and defiant of thy deity,
let them expiate their sin; aid not such with thy succour. But if so
many oracles guided them, given by god and ghost, why may aught now
reverse thine ordinance or write destiny anew? Why should I recall the
fleets burned on the coast of Eryx? why the king of storms, and the
raging winds roused from Aeolia, or Iris driven down the clouds? Now
hell too is stirred (this share of the world was yet untried) and
Allecto suddenly let loose above to riot through the Italian towns. In
no wise am I moved for empire; that was our hope while Fortune stood;
let those conquer whom thou wilt. If thy cruel wife leave no region free
to Teucrians, by the smoking ruins of desolated Troy, O father, I
beseech thee, grant Ascanius unhurt retreat from arms, grant me my
child's life. Aeneas may well be tossed over unknown seas and follow
what path soever fortune open to him; him let me avail to shelter and
withdraw from the turmoil of battle. Amathus is mine, high Paphos and
Cythera, and my house of Idalia; here, far from arms, let him spend an
inglorious life. Bid Carthage in high lordship rule Ausonia; there will
be nothing there to check the Tyrian cities. What help was it for the
Trojans to escape war's doom and thread their flight through Argive
fires, to have exhausted all those perils of sea and desolate lands,
while they seek Latium and the towers of a Troy rebuilt? Were it not
better to have [59-91] clung to the last ashes of their country, and the
ground where once was Troy? Give back, I pray, Xanthus and Simoïs to a
wretched people, and let the Teucrians again, O Lord, circle through the
fates of Ilium.'



Then Queen Juno, swift and passionate:



'Why forcest thou me to break long silence and proclaim my hidden pain?
Hath any man or god constrained Aeneas to court war or make armed attack
on King Latinus? In oracular guidance he steered for Italy: be it so: he
whom raving Cassandra sent on his way! Did we urge him to quit the camp
or entrust his life to the winds? to give the issue of war and the
charge of his ramparts to a child? to stir the loyalty of Tyrrhenia or
throw peaceful nations into tumult? What god, what potent cruelty of
ours, hath driven him on his hurt? Where is Juno in this, or Iris sped
down the clouds? It shocks thee that Italians should enring an infant
Troy with flame, and Turnus set foot on his own ancestral soil—he,
grandchild of Pilumnus, son of Venilia the goddess: how, that the dark
brands of Troy assail the Latins? that Trojans subjugate and plunder
fields not their own? how, that they choose their brides and tear
plighted bosom from bosom? that their gestures plead for peace, and
their ships are lined with arms? Thou canst steal thine Aeneas from
Grecian hands, and spread before them a human semblance of mist and
empty air; thou canst turn his fleet into nymphs of like number: is it
dreadful if we retaliate with any aid to the Rutulians? Aeneas is away
and ignorant; away and ignorant let him be. Paphos is thine and Idalium,
thine high Cythera; why meddlest thou with fierce spirits and a city big
with war? Is it we who would overthrow the tottering state of Phrygia?
we? or he who brought the Achaeans down on the hapless Trojans? who made
Europe and Asia bristle up in arms, and whose theft shattered the
alliance? Was it in my guidance the [92-125] adulterous Dardanian broke
into Sparta? or did I send the shafts of passion that kindled war? Then
terror for thy children had graced thee; too late now dost thou rise
with unjust complaints, and reproaches leave thy lips in vain.'



Thus Juno pleaded; and all the heavenly people murmured in diverse
consent; even as rising gusts murmur when caught in the forests, and
eddy in blind moanings, betraying to sailors the gale's approach. Then
the Lord omnipotent and primal power of the world begins; as he speaks
the high house of the gods and trembling floor of earth sink to silence;
silent is the deep sky, and the breezes are stilled; ocean hushes his
waters into calm.



'Take then to heart and lay deep these words of mine. Since it may not
be that Ausonians and Teucrians join alliance, and your quarrel finds no
term, to-day, what fortune each wins, what hope each follows, be he
Trojan or Rutulian, I will hold in even poise; whether it be Italy's
fate or Trojan blundering and ill advice that holds the camp in leaguer.
Nor do I acquit the Rutulians. Each as he hath begun shall work out his
destiny. Jupiter is one and king over all; the fates will find their
way.' By his brother's infernal streams, by the banks of the pitchy
black-boiling chasm he signed assent, and made all Olympus quiver at his
nod. Here speaking ended: thereon Jupiter rises from his golden throne,
and the heavenly people surround and escort him to the doorway.



Meanwhile the Rutulians press round all the gates, dealing grim
slaughter and girdling the walls with flame. But the army of the
Aeneadae are held leaguered within their trenches, with no hope of
retreat. They stand helpless and disconsolate on their high towers, and
their thin ring girdles the walls,—Asius, son of Imbrasus, and
Thymoetes, son of Hicetaon, and the two Assaraci, and Castor, and old
Thymbris together in the front rank: by them Clarus and
[126-160] Themon, both full brothers to Sarpedon, out of high Lycia.
Acmon of Lyrnesus, great as his father Clytius, or his brother
Mnestheus, carries a stone, straining all his vast frame to the huge
mountain fragment. Emulously they keep their guard, these with javelins,
those with stones, and wield fire and fit arrows on the string. Amid
them he, Venus' fittest care, lo! the Dardanian boy, his graceful head
uncovered, shines even as a gem set in red gold on ornament of throat or
head, or even as gleaming ivory cunningly inlaid in boxwood or Orician
terebinth; his tresses lie spread over his milk-white neck, bound by a
flexible circlet of gold. Thee, too, Ismarus, proud nations saw aiming
wounds and arming thy shafts with poison,—thee, of house illustrious in
Maeonia, where the rich tilth is wrought by men's hands, and Pactolus
waters it with gold. There too was Mnestheus, exalted in fame as he who
erewhile had driven Turnus from the ramparts; and Capys, from whom is
drawn the name of the Campanian city.



They had closed in grim war's mutual conflict; Aeneas, while night was
yet deep, clove the seas. For when, leaving Evander for the Etruscan
camp, he hath audience of the king, and tells the king of his name and
race, and what he asks or offers, instructs him of the arms Mezentius is
winning to his side, and of Turnus' overbearing spirit, reminds him what
is all the certainty of human things, and mingles all with entreaties;
delaying not, Tarchon joins forces and strikes alliance. Then, freed
from the oracle, the Lydian people man their fleet, laid by divine
ordinance in the foreign captain's hand. Aeneas' galley keeps in front,
with the lions of Phrygia fastened on her prow, above them overhanging
Ida, sight most welcome to the Trojan exiles. Here great Aeneas sits
revolving the changing issues of war; and Pallas, clinging on his left
side, asks now [161-195] of the stars and their pathway through the dark
night, now of his fortunes by land and sea.



Open now the gates of Helicon, goddesses, and stir the song of the band
that come the while with Aeneas from the Tuscan borders, and sail in
armed ships overseas.



First in the brazen-plated Tiger Massicus cuts the flood; beneath him
are ranked a thousand men who have left Clusium town and the city of
Cosae; their weapons are arrows, and light quivers on the shoulder, and
their deadly bow. With him goes grim Abas, all his train in shining
armour, and a gilded Apollo glittering astern. To him Populonia had
given six hundred of her children, tried in war, but Ilva three hundred,
the island rich in unexhausted mines of steel. Third Asilas, interpreter
between men and gods, master of the entrails of beasts and the stars in
heaven, of speech of birds and ominous lightning flashes, draws a
thousand men after him in serried lines bristling with spears, bidden to
his command from Pisa city, of Alphaean birth on Etruscan soil. Astyr
follows, excellent in beauty, Astyr, confident in his horse and glancing
arms. Three hundred more—all have one heart to follow—come from the
householders of Caere and the fields of Minio, and ancient Pyrgi, and
fever-stricken Graviscae.



Let me not pass thee by, O Cinyras, bravest in war of Ligurian captains,
and thee, Cupavo, with thy scant company, from whose crest rise the swan
plumes, fault, O Love, of thee and thine, and blazonment of his father's
form. For they tell that Cycnus, in grief for his beloved Phaëthon,
while he sings and soothes his woeful love with music amid the shady
sisterhood of poplar boughs, drew over him the soft plumage of white old
age, and left earth and passed crying through the sky. His son, followed
on shipboard with a band of like age, sweeps the huge Centaur forward
with his oars; he leans over the water, and [196-227] threatens the
waves with a vast rock he holds on high, and furrows the deep seas with
his length of keel.



He too calls a train from his native coasts, Ocnus, son of prophetic
Manto and the river of Tuscany, who gave thee, O Mantua, ramparts and
his mother's name; Mantua, rich in ancestry, yet not all of one blood, a
threefold race, and under each race four cantons; herself she is the
cantons' head, and her strength is of Tuscan blood. From her likewise
hath Mezentius five hundred in arms against him, whom Mincius, child of
Benacus, draped in gray reeds, led to battle in his advancing pine.
Aulestes moves on heavily, smiting the waves with the swinging forest of
an hundred oars; the channels foam as they sweep the sea-floor. He sails
in the vast Triton, who amazes the blue waterways with his shell, and
swims on with shaggy front, in human show from the flank upward; his
belly ends in a dragon; beneath the monster's breast the wave gurgles
into foam. So many were the chosen princes who went in thirty ships to
aid Troy, and cut the salt plains with brazen prow.



And now day had faded from the sky, and gracious Phoebe trod mid-heaven
in the chariot of her nightly wandering: Aeneas, for his charge allows
not rest to his limbs, himself sits guiding the tiller and managing the
sails. And lo, in middle course a band of his own fellow-voyagers meets
him, the nymphs whom bountiful Cybele had bidden be gods of the sea, and
turn to nymphs from ships; they swam on in even order, and cleft the
flood, as many as erewhile, brazen-plated prows, had anchored on the
beach. From far they know their king, and wheel their bands about him,
and Cymodocea, their readiest in speech, comes up behind, catching the
stern with her right hand: her back rises out, and her left hand oars
her passage through the silent water. Then she thus [228-261] accosts
her amazed lord: 'Wakest thou, seed of gods, Aeneas? wake, and loosen
the sheets of thy sails. We are thy fleet, Idaean pines from the holy
hill, now nymphs of the sea. When the treacherous Rutulian urged us
headlong with sword and fire, unwillingly we broke thy bonds, and we
search for thee over ocean. This new guise our Lady made for us in pity,
and granted us to be goddesses and spend our life under the waves. But
thy boy Ascanius is held within wall and trench among the Latin weapons
and the rough edge of war. Already the Arcadian cavalry and the brave
Etruscan together hold the appointed ground. Turnus' plan is fixed to
bar their way with his squadrons, that they may not reach the camp. Up
and arise, and ere the coming of the Dawn bid thy crews be called to
arms; and take thou the shield which the Lord of Fire forged for victory
and rimmed about with gold. To-morrow's daylight, if thou deem not my
words vain, shall see Rutulians heaped high in slaughter.' She ended,
and, as she went, pushed the tall ship on with her hand wisely and well;
the ship shoots through the water fleeter than javelin or windswift
arrow. Thereat the rest quicken their speed. The son of Anchises of Troy
is himself deep in bewilderment; yet the omen cheers his courage. Then
looking on the heavenly vault, he briefly prays: 'O gracious upon Ida,
mother of gods, whose delight is in Dindymus and turreted cities and
lions coupled to thy rein, do thou lead me in battle, do thou meetly
prosper thine augury, and draw nigh thy Phrygians, goddess, with
favourable feet.' Thus much he spoke; and meanwhile the broad light of
returning day now began to pour in, and chased away the night. First he
commands his comrades to follow his signals, brace their courage to arms
and prepare for battle. And now his Trojans and his camp are in his
sight as he stands high astern, when next he lifts the [262-296] blazing
shield on his left arm. The Dardanians on the walls raise a shout to the
sky. Hope comes to kindle wrath; they hurl their missiles strongly; even
as under black clouds cranes from the Strymon utter their signal notes
and sail clamouring across the sky, and noisily stream down the gale.
But this seemed marvellous to the Rutulian king and the captains of
Ausonia, till looking back they see the ships steering for the beach,
and all the sea as a single fleet sailing in. His helmet-spike blazes,
flame pours from the cresting plumes, and the golden shield-boss spouts
floods of fire; even as when in transparent night comets glow blood-red
and drear, or the splendour of Sirius, that brings drought and
sicknesses on wretched men, rises and saddens the sky with malignant
beams.



Yet gallant Turnus in unfailing confidence will prevent them on the
shore and repel their approach to land. 'What your prayers have sought
is given, the sweep of the sword-arm. The god of battles is in the hands
of men. Now remember each his wife and home: now recall the high deeds
of our fathers' honour. Let us challenge meeting at the water's edge,
while they waver and their feet yet slip as they disembark. Fortune aids
daring. . . .' So speaks he, and counsels inly whom he shall lead to meet
them, whom leave in charge of the leaguered walls.



Meanwhile Aeneas lands his allies by gangways from the high ships. Many
watch the retreat and slack of the sea, and leap boldly into the shoal
water; others slide down the oars. Tarchon, marking the shore where the
shallows do not seethe and plash with broken water, but the sea glides
up and spreads its tide unbroken, suddenly turns his bows to land and
implores his comrades: 'Now, O chosen crew, bend strongly to your oars;
lift your ships, make them go; let the prows cleave this hostile land
and the keel plough [297-330] herself a furrow. I will let my vessel
break up on such harbourage if once she takes the land.' When Tarchon
had spoken in such wise, his comrades rise on their oar-blades and carry
their ships in foam towards the Latin fields, till the prows are fast on
dry land and all the keels are aground unhurt. But not thy galley,
Tarchon; for she dashes on a shoal, and swings long swaying on the cruel
bank, pitching and slapping the flood, then breaks up, and lands her
crew among the waves. Broken oars and floating thwarts entangle them,
and the ebbing wave sucks their feet away.



Nor does Turnus keep idly dallying, but swiftly hurries his whole array
against the Trojans and ranges it to face the beach. The trumpets blow.
At once Aeneas charges and confounds the rustic squadrons of the Latins,
and slays Theron for omen of battle. The giant advances to challenge
Aeneas; but through sewed plates of brass and tunic rough with gold the
sword plunges in his open side. Next he strikes Lichas, cut from his
mother already dead, and consecrated, Phoebus, to thee, since his
infancy was granted escape from the perilous steel. Near thereby he
struck dead brawny Cisseus and vast Gyas, whose clubs were mowing down
whole files: naught availed them the arms of Hercules and their strength
of hand, nor Melampus their father, ever of Alcides' company while earth
yielded him sore travail. Lo! while Pharus utters weak vaunts the hurled
javelin strikes on his shouting mouth. Thou too, while thou followest
thy new delight, Clytius, whose cheeks are golden with youthful
down—thou, luckless Cydon, struck down by the Dardanian hand, wert
lying past thought, ah pitiable! of the young loves that were ever
thine, did not the close array of thy brethren interpose, the children
of Phorcus, seven in number, and send a sevenfold shower of darts. Some
glance ineffectual from helmet and shield; [331-365] some Venus the
bountiful turned aside as they grazed his body. Aeneas calls to trusty
Achates: 'Give me store of weapons; none that hath been planted in
Grecian body on the plains of Ilium shall my hand hurl at Rutulian in
vain.' Then he catches and throws his great spear; the spear flies
grinding through the brass of Maeon's shield, and breaks through corslet
and through breast. His brother Alcanor runs up and sustains with his
right arm his sinking brother; through his arm the spear passes speeding
straight on its message, and holds its bloody way, and the hand dangles
by the sinews lifeless from the shoulder. Then Numitor, seizing his dead
brother's javelin, aims at Aeneas, but might not fairly pierce him, and
grazed tall Achates on the thigh. Here Clausus of Cures comes confident
in his pride of strength, and with a long reach strikes Dryops under the
chin, and, urging the stiff spear-shaft home, stops the accents of his
speech and his life together, piercing the throat; but he strikes the
earth with his forehead, and vomits clots of blood. Three Thracians
likewise of Boreas' sovereign race, and three sent by their father Idas
from their native Ismarus, fall in divers wise before him. Halesus and
his Auruncan troops hasten thither; Messapus too, seed of Neptune, comes
up charioted. This side and that strive to hurl back the enemy, and
fight hard on the very edge of Ausonia. As when in the depth of air
adverse winds rise in battle with equal spirit and strength; not they,
not clouds nor sea, yield one to another; long the battle is doubtful;
all stands locked in counterpoise: even thus clash the ranks of Troy and
ranks of Latium, foot fast on foot, and man crowded up on man.



But in another quarter, where a torrent had driven a wide path of
rolling stones and bushes torn away from the banks, Pallas saw his
Arcadians, unaccustomed to move as infantry, giving back before the
Latin pursuit, when the [366-400] roughness of the ground bade them
dismount. This only was left in his strait, to kindle them to valour,
now by entreaties, now by taunts: 'Whither flee you, comrades? by your
deeds of bravery, by your leader Evander's name, by your triumphant
campaigns, and my hope that now rises to rival my father's honour, trust
not to flight. Our swords must hew a way through the enemy. Where yonder
mass of men presses thickest, there your proud country calls you with
Pallas at your head. No gods are they who bear us down; mortals, we feel
the pressure of a mortal foe; we have as many lives and hands as he. Lo,
the deep shuts us in with vast sea barrier; even now land fails our
flight; shall we make ocean or Troy our goal?'



So speaks he, and bursts amid the serried foe. First Lagus meets him,
drawn thither by malign destiny; him, as he tugs at a ponderous stone,
hurling his spear where the spine ran dissevering the ribs, he pierces
and wrenches out the spear where it stuck fast in the bone. Nor does
Hisbo catch him stooping, for all that he hoped it; for Pallas, as he
rushes unguarded on, furious at his comrade's cruel death, receives him
on his sword and buries it in his distended lungs. Next he attacks
Sthenius, and Anchemolus of Rhoetus' ancient family, who dared to
violate the bridal chamber of his stepmother. You, too, the twins
Larides and Thymber, fell on the Rutulian fields, children of Daucus,
indistinguishable for likeness and a sweet perplexity to your parents.
But now Pallas made cruel difference between you; for thy head, Thymber,
is swept off by Evander's sword; thy right hand, Larides, severed, seeks
its master, and the dying fingers jerk and clutch at the sword. Fired by
his encouragement, and beholding his noble deeds, the Arcadians advance
in wrath and shame to meet the enemy in arms. Then Pallas pierces
Rhoeteus as he flies past in his chariot. This space, this
[401-435] much of respite was given to Ilus; for at Ilus he had aimed
the strong spear from afar, and Rhoeteus intercepts its passage, in
flight from thee, noble Teuthras and Tyres thy brother; he rolls from
the chariot in death, and his heels strike the Rutulian fields. And as
the shepherd, when summer winds have risen to his desire, kindles the
woods dispersedly; on a sudden the mid spaces catch, and a single
flickering line of fire spreads wide over the plain; he sits looking
down on his conquest and the revel of the flames; even so, Pallas, do
thy brave comrades gather close to sustain thee. But warrior Halesus
advances full on them, gathering himself behind his armour; he slays
Ladon, Pheres, Demodocus; his gleaming sword shears off Strymonius' hand
as it rises to his throat; he strikes Thoas on the face with a stone,
and drives the bones asunder in a shattered mass of blood and brains.
Halesus had his father the soothsayer kept hidden in the woodland: when
the old man's glazing eyes sank to death, the Fates laid hand on him and
devoted him to the arms of Evander. Pallas aims at him, first praying
thus: 'Grant now, lord Tiber, to the steel I poise and hurl, a
prosperous way through brawny Halesus' breast; thine oak shall bear
these arms and the dress he wore.' The god heard it; while Halesus
covers Imaon, he leaves, alas! his breast unarmed to the Arcadian's
weapon. Yet at his grievous death Lausus, himself a great arm of the
war, lets not his columns be dismayed; at once he meets and cuts down
Abas, the check and stay of their battle. The men of Arcadia go down
before him; down go the Etruscans, and you, O Teucrians, invincible by
Greece. The armies close, matched in strength and in captains; the rear
ranks crowd in; weapons and hands are locked in the press. Here Pallas
strains and pushes on, here Lausus opposite, nearly matched in age,
excellent in beauty; but fortune [436-467] had denied both return to
their own land. Yet that they should meet face to face the sovereign of
high Olympus allowed not; an early fate awaits them beneath a mightier
foe.



Meanwhile Turnus' gracious sister bids him take Lausus' room, and his
fleet chariot parts the ranks. When he saw his comrades, 'It is time,'
he cried, 'to stay from battle. I alone must assail Pallas; to me and
none other Pallas is due; I would his father himself were here to see.'
So speaks he, and his Rutulians draw back from a level space at his
bidding. But then as they withdrew, he, wondering at the haughty
command, stands in amaze at Turnus, his eyes scanning the vast frame,
and his fierce glance perusing him from afar. And with these words he
returns the words of the monarch: 'For me, my praise shall even now be
in the lordly spoils I win, or in illustrious death: my father will bear
calmly either lot: away with menaces.' He speaks, and advances into the
level ring. The Arcadians' blood gathers chill about their hearts.
Turnus leaps from his chariot and prepares to close with him. And as a
lion sees from some lofty outlook a bull stand far off on the plain
revolving battle, and flies at him, even such to see is Turnus' coming.
When Pallas deemed him within reach of a spear-throw, he advances, if so
chance may assist the daring of his overmatched strength, and thus cries
into the depth of sky: 'By my father's hospitality and the board whereto
thou camest a wanderer, on thee I call, Alcides; be favourable to my
high emprise; let Turnus even in death discern me stripping his
blood-stained armour, and his swooning eyes endure the sight of his
conqueror.' Alcides heard him, and deep in his heart he stifled a heavy
sigh, and let idle tears fall. Then with kindly words the father accosts
his son: 'Each hath his own appointed day; short and irrecoverable
[468-502] is the span of life for all: but to spread renown by deeds is
the task of valour. Under high Troy town many and many a god's son fell;
nay, mine own child Sarpedon likewise perished. Turnus too his own fate
summons, and his allotted period hath reached the goal.' So speaks he,
and turns his eyes away from the Rutulian fields. But Pallas hurls his
spear with all his strength, and pulls his sword flashing out of the
hollow scabbard. The flying spear lights where the armour rises high
above the shoulder, and, forcing a way through the shield's rim, ceased
not till it drew blood from mighty Turnus. At this Turnus long poises
the spear-shaft with its sharp steel head, and hurls it on Pallas with
these words: See thou if our weapon have not a keener point. He ended;
but for all the shield's plating of iron and brass, for all the
bull-hide that covers it round about, the quivering spear-head smashes
it fair through and through, passes the guard of the corslet, and
pierces the breast with a gaping hole. He tears the warm weapon from the
wound; in vain; together and at once life-blood and sense follow it. He
falls heavily on the ground, his armour clashes over him, and his
bloodstained face sinks in death on the hostile soil. And Turnus
standing over him . . .: 'Arcadians,' he cries, 'remember these my words,
and bear them to Evander. I send him back his Pallas as was due. All the
meed of the tomb, all the solace of sepulture, I give freely. Dearly
must he pay his welcome to Aeneas.' And with these words, planting his
left foot on the dead, he tore away the broad heavy sword-belt engraven
with a tale of crime, the array of grooms foully slain together on their
bridal night, and the nuptial chambers dabbled with blood, which Clonus,
son of Eurytus, had wrought richly in gold. Now Turnus exults in
spoiling him of it, and rejoices at his prize. Ah spirit of man,
ignorant of fate and the allotted future, or to keep bounds when elate
with prosperity!—the day will [503-535] come when Turnus shall desire
to have bought Pallas' safety at a great ransom, and curse the spoils of
this fatal day. But with many moans and tears Pallas' comrades lay him
on his shield and bear him away amid their ranks. O grief and glory and
grace of the father to whom thou shalt return! This one day sent thee
first to war, this one day takes thee away, while yet thou leavest
heaped high thy Rutulian dead.



And now no rumour of the dreadful loss, but a surer messenger flies to
Aeneas, telling him his troops are on the thin edge of doom; it is time
to succour the routed Teucrians. He mows down all that meets him, and
hews a broad path through their columns with furious sword, as he seeks
thee, O Turnus, in thy fresh pride of slaughter. Pallas, Evander, all
flash before his eyes; the board whereto but then he had first come a
wanderer, and the clasped hands. Here four of Sulmo's children, as many
more of Ufens' nurture, are taken by him alive to slaughter in sacrifice
to the shade below, and slake the flames of the pyre with captive blood.
Next he levelled his spear full on Magus from far. He stoops cunningly;
the spear flies quivering over him; and, clasping his knees, he speaks
thus beseechingly: 'By thy father's ghost, by Iülus thy growing hope, I
entreat thee, save this life for a child and a parent. My house is
stately; deep in it lies buried wealth of engraven silver; I have masses
of wrought and unwrought gold. The victory of Troy does not turn on
this, nor will a single life make so great a difference.' He ended; to
him Aeneas thus returns answer: 'All the wealth of silver and gold thou
tellest of, spare thou for thy children. Turnus hath broken off this thy
trafficking in war, even then when Pallas fell. Thus judges the ghost of
my father Anchises, thus Iülus.' So speaking, he grasps his helmet with
his left hand, and, bending back his neck, drives his [536-572] sword up
to the hilt in the suppliant. Hard by is Haemonides, priest of Phoebus
and Trivia, his temples wound with the holy ribboned chaplet, all
glittering in white-robed array. Him he meets and chases down the plain,
and, standing over his fallen foe, slaughters him and wraps him in great
darkness; Serestus gathers the armour and carries it away on his
shoulders, a trophy, King Gradivus, to thee. Caeculus, born of Vulcan's
race, and Umbro, who comes from the Marsian hills, fill up the line. The
Dardanian rushes full on them. His sword had hewn off Anxur's left arm,
with all the circle of the shield—he had uttered brave words and deemed
his prowess would second his vaunts, and perchance with spirit lifted up
had promised himself hoar age and length of years—when Tarquitus in the
pride of his glittering arms met his fiery course, whom the nymph Dryope
had borne to Faunus, haunter of the woodland. Drawing back his spear, he
pins the ponderous shield to the corslet; then, as he vainly pleaded and
would say many a thing, strikes his head to the ground, and, rolling
away the warm body, cries thus over his enemy: 'Lie there now, terrible
one! no mother's love shall lay thee in the sod, or place thy limbs
beneath thine heavy ancestral tomb. To birds of prey shalt thou be left,
or borne down sunk in the eddying water, where hungry fish shall suck
thy wounds.' Next he sweeps on Antaeus and Lucas, the first of Turnus'
train, and brave Numa and tawny-haired Camers, born of noble Volscens,
who was wealthiest in land of the Ausonians, and reigned in silent
Amyclae. Even as Aegaeon, who, men say, had an hundred arms, an hundred
hands, fifty mouths and breasts ablaze with fire, and arrayed against
Jove's thunders as many clashing shields and drawn swords: so Aeneas,
when once his sword's point grew warm, rages victorious over all the
field. Nay, lo! he darts full in face on Niphaeus' four-horse chariot;
before his long strides [573-608] and dreadful cry they turned in terror
and dashed back, throwing out their driver and tearing the chariot down
the beach. Meanwhile the brothers Lucagus and Liger drive up with their
pair of white horses. Lucagus valiantly waves his drawn sword, while his
brother wheels his horses with the rein. Aeneas, wrathful at their mad
onslaught, rushes on them, towering high with levelled spear. To him
Liger . . . 'Not Diomede's horses dost thou discern, nor Achilles'
chariot, nor the plains of Phrygia: now on this soil of ours the war and
thy life shall end together.' Thus fly mad Liger's random words. But not
in words does the Trojan hero frame his reply: for he hurls his javelin
at the foe. As Lucagus spurred on his horses, bending forward over the
whip, with left foot advanced ready for battle, the spear passes through
the lower rim of his shining shield and pierces his left groin, knocks
him out of the chariot, and stretches him in death on the fields. To him
good Aeneas speaks in bitter words: 'Lucagus, no slackness in thy
coursers' flight hath betrayed thee, or vain shadow of the foe turned
them back; thyself thou leapest off the harnessed wheels.' In such wise
he spoke, and caught the horses. His brother, slipping down from the
chariot, pitiably outstretched helpless hands: 'Ah, by the parents who
gave thee birth, great Trojan, spare this life and pity my prayer.' More
he was pleading; but Aeneas: 'Not such were the words thou wert
uttering. Die, and be brother undivided from brother.' With that his
sword's point pierces the breast where the life lies hid. Thus the
Dardanian captain dealt death over the plain, like some raging torrent
stream or black whirlwind. At last the boy Ascanius and his troops burst
through the ineffectual leaguer and issue from the camp.



Meanwhile Jupiter breaks silence to accost Juno: 'O sister and wife best
beloved, it is Venus, as thou deemedst, [609-639] nor is thy judgment
astray, who sustains the forces of Troy; not their own valour of hand in
war, and untamable spirit and endurance in peril.' To whom Juno
beseechingly:



'Why, fair my lord, vexest thou one sick at heart and trembling at thy
bitter words? If that force were in my love that once was, and that was
well, never had thine omnipotence denied me leave to withdraw Turnus
from battle and preserve him for his father Daunus in safety. Now let
him perish, and pay forfeit to the Trojans of his innocent blood. Yet he
traces his birth from our name, and Pilumnus was his father in the
fourth generation, and oft and again his bountiful hand hath heaped thy
courts with gifts.'



To her the king of high heaven thus briefly spoke: 'If thy prayer for
him is delay of present death and respite from his fall, and thou dost
understand that I ordain it thus, remove thy Turnus in flight, and
snatch him from the fate that is upon him. For so much indulgence there
is room. But if any ampler grace mask itself in these thy prayers, and
thou dreamest of change in the whole movement of the war, idle is the
hope thou nursest.'



And Juno, weeping: 'Ah yet, if thy mind were gracious where thy lips are
stern, and this gift of life might remain confirmed to Turnus! Now his
portion is bitter and guiltless death, or I wander idly from the truth.
Yet, oh that I rather deluded myself with false alarms, and thou who
canst wouldst bend thy course to better counsels.'



These words uttered, she darted through the air straight from high
heaven, cloud-girt in driving tempest, and sought the Ilian ranks and
camp of Laurentum. Then the goddess, strange and ominous to see,
fashions into the likeness of Aeneas a thin and pithless shade of hollow
mist, decks it with Dardanian weapons, and gives it the mimicry of
shield and divine helmet plume, gives unsubstantial [640-673] words and
senseless utterance, and the mould and motion of his tread: like shapes
rumoured to flit when death is past, or dreams that delude the
slumbering senses. But in front of the battle-ranks the phantom dances
rejoicingly, and with arms and mocking accents provokes the foe. Turnus
hastens up and sends his spear whistling from far on it; it gives back
and turns its footsteps. Then indeed Turnus, when he believed Aeneas
turned and fled from him, and his spirit madly drank in the illusive
hope: 'Whither fliest thou, Aeneas? forsake not thy plighted bridal
chamber. This hand shall give thee the land thou hast sought overseas.'
So clamouring he pursues, and brandishes his drawn sword, and sees not
that his rejoicing is drifting with the winds. The ship lay haply moored
to a high ledge of rock, with ladders run out and gangway ready, wherein
king Osinius sailed from the coasts of Clusium. Here the fluttering
phantom of flying Aeneas darts and hides itself. Nor is Turnus slack to
follow; he overleaps the barriers and springs across the high gangways.
Scarcely had he lighted on the prow; the daughter of Saturn snaps the
hawser, and the ship, parted from her cable, runs out on the ebbing
tide. And him Aeneas seeks for battle and finds not, and sends many a
man that meets him to death. Then the light phantom seeks not yet any
further hiding-place, but, flitting aloft, melts in a dark cloud; and a
blast comes down meanwhile and sweeps Turnus through the seas. He looks
back, witless of his case and thankless for his salvation, and, wailing,
stretches both hands to heaven: 'Father omnipotent, was I so guilty in
thine eyes, and is this the punishment thou hast ordained? Whither am I
borne? whence came I? what flight is this, or in what guise do I return?
Shall I look again on the camp or walls of Laurentum? What of that array
of men who followed me to arms? whom—oh horrible!—I have abandoned all
amid [674-707] a dreadful death; and now I see the stragglers and catch
the groans of those who fall. What do I? or how may earth ever yawn for
me deep enough? Do you rather, O winds, be pitiful, carry my bark on
rock or reef; it is I, Turnus, who desire and implore you; or drive me
on the cruel shoals of the Syrtis, where no Rutulian may follow nor
rumour know my name.' Thus speaking, he wavers in mind this way and
that: maddened by the shame, shall he plunge on his sword's harsh point
and drive it through his side, or fling himself among the waves, and
seek by swimming to gain the winding shore, again to return on the
Trojan arms? Thrice he essayed either way; thrice queenly Juno checked
and restrained him in pity of heart. Cleaving the deep, he floats with
the tide down the flood, and is borne on to his father Daunus' ancient
city.



But meanwhile at Jove's prompting fiery Mezentius takes his place in the
battle and assails the triumphant Teucrians. The Tyrrhene ranks gather
round him, and all at once in unison shower their darts down on the
hated foe. As a cliff that juts into the waste of waves, meeting the
raging winds and breasting the deep, endures all the threatening force
of sky and sea, itself fixed immovable, so he dashes to earth Hebrus son
of Dolichaon, and with him Latagus, and Palmus as he fled; catching
Latagus full front in the face with a vast fragment of mountain rock,
while Palmus he hamstrings, and leaves him rolling helpless; his armour
he gives Lausus to wear on his shoulders, and the plumes to fix on his
crest. With them fall Evanthes the Phrygian, and Mimas, fellow and
birthmate of Paris; for on one night Theano bore him to his father
Amycus, and the queen, Cisseus' daughter, was delivered of Paris the
firebrand; he sleeps in his fathers' city; Mimas lies a stranger on the
Laurentian coast. And as the boar driven by snapping hounds from the
mountain heights, [708-744] many a year hidden by Vesulus in his pines,
many an one fed in the Laurentian marsh among the reedy forest, once
come among the nets, halts and snorts savagely, with shoulders bristling
up, and none of them dare be wrathful or draw closer, but they shower
from a safe distance their darts and cries; even thus none of those
whose anger is righteous against Mezentius have courage to meet him with
drawn weapon: far off they provoke him with missiles and huge clamour,
and he turns slow and fearless round about, grinding his teeth as he
shakes the spears off his shield. From the bounds of ancient Corythus
Acron the Greek had come, leaving for exile a bride half won. Seeing him
afar dealing confusion amid the ranks, in crimson plumes and his
plighted wife's purple,—as an unpastured lion often ranging the deep
coverts, for madness of hunger urges him, if he haply catches sight of a
timorous roe or high-antlered stag, he gapes hugely for joy, and, with
mane on end, clings crouching over its flesh, his cruel mouth bathed in
reeking gore. . . . so Mezentius darts lightly among the thick of the
enemy. Hapless Acron goes down, and, spurning the dark ground, gasps out
his life, and covers the broken javelin with his blood. But the victor
deigned not to bring down Orodes with the blind wound of his flying
lance as he fled; full face to face he meets him, and engages man with
man, conqueror not by stealth but armed valour. Then, as with planted
foot, he thrust him off the spear: 'O men,' he cries, 'Orodes lies low,
no slight arm of the war.' His comrades shout after him the glad battle
chant. And the dying man: 'Not unavenged nor long, whoso thou art, shalt
thou be glad in victory: thee too an equal fate marks down, and in these
fields thou shalt soon lie.' And smiling on him half wrathfully,
Mezentius: 'Now die thou. But of me let the father of gods and king of
men take counsel.' So saying, he drew the weapon out of his body.
[745-780] Grim rest and iron slumber seal his eyes; his lids close on
everlasting night. Caedicus slays Alcathoüs, Sacrator Hydaspes, Rapo
Parthenius and the grim strength of Orses, Messapus Clonius and
Erichaetes son of Lycaon, the one when his reinless horse stumbling had
flung him to the ground, the other as they met on foot. And Agis the
Lycian advanced only to be struck from horseback by Valerus, brave as
his ancestry; and Thronius by Salius, and Salius by Nealces with
treacherous arrow-shot that stole from far.



Now the heavy hand of war dealt equal woe and counterchange of death; in
even balance conquerors and conquered slew and fell; nor one nor other
knows of retreat. The gods in Jove's house pity the vain rage of either
and all the agonising of mortals. From one side Venus, from one opposite
Juno, daughter of Saturn, looks on; pale Tisiphone rages among the many
thousand men. But now, brandishing his huge spear, Mezentius strides
glooming over the plain, vast as Orion when, with planted foot, he
cleaves his way through the vast pools of mid-ocean and his shoulder
overtops the waves, or carrying an ancient mountain-ash from the
hilltops, paces the ground and hides his head among the clouds: so moves
Mezentius, huge in arms. Aeneas, espying him in the deep columns, makes
on to meet him. He remains, unterrified, awaiting his noble foe, steady
in his own bulk, and measures with his eye the fair range for a spear.
'This right hand's divinity, and the weapon I poise and hurl, now be
favourable! thee, Lausus, I vow for the live trophy of Aeneas, dressed
in the spoils stripped from the pirate's body.' He ends, and throws the
spear whistling from far; it flies on, glancing from the shield, and
pierces illustrious Antores hard by him sidelong in the flank; Antores,
companion of Hercules, who, sent thither from Argos, had stayed by
Evander, and [781-814] settled in an Italian town. Hapless he goes down
with a wound not his own, and in death gazes on the sky, and Argos is
sweet in his remembrance. Then good Aeneas throws his spear; through the
sheltering circle of threefold brass, through the canvas lining and
fabric of triple-sewn bull-hide it went, and sank deep in his groin; yet
carried not its strength home. Quickly Aeneas, joyful at the sight of
the Tyrrhenian's blood, snatches his sword from his thigh and presses
hotly on his struggling enemy. Lausus saw, and groaned deeply for love
of his dear father, and tears rolled over his face. Here will I not keep
silence of thy hard death-doom and thine excellent deeds (if in any wise
things wrought in the old time may win belief), nor of thyself, O fitly
remembered! He, helpless and trammelled, withdrew backward, the deadly
spear-shaft trailing from his shield. The youth broke forward and
plunged into the fight; and even as Aeneas' hand rose to bring down the
blow, he caught up his point and held him in delay. His comrades follow
up with loud cries, so the father may withdraw in shelter of his son's
shield, while they shower their darts and bear back the enemy with
missiles from a distance. Aeneas wrathfully keeps covered. And as when
storm-clouds pour down in streaming hail, all the ploughmen and
country-folk scatter off the fields, and the wayfarer cowers safe in his
fortress, a stream's bank or deep arch of rock, while the rain falls,
that they may do their day's labour when sunlight reappears; thus under
the circling storm of weapons Aeneas sustains the cloud of war till it
thunders itself all away, and calls on Lausus, on Lausus, with chiding
and menace: 'Whither runnest thou on thy death, with daring beyond thy
strength? thine affection betrays thee into rashness.' But none the less
he leaps madly on; and now wrath rises higher and fiercer in the
Dardanian captain, and the Fates pass Lausus' last [815-849] threads
through their hand; for Aeneas drives the sword strongly right through
him up all its length: the point pierced the light shield that armed his
assailant, and the tunic sewn by his mother with flexible gold: blood
filled his breast, and the life left the body and passed mourning
through the air to the under world. But when Anchises' son saw the look
on the dying face, the face pale in wonderful wise, he sighed deeply in
pity, and reached forth his hand, as the likeness of his own filial
affection flashed across his soul. 'What now shall good Aeneas give
thee, what, O poor boy, for this thy praise, for guerdon of a nature so
noble? Keep for thine own the armour thou didst delight in; and I
restore thee, if that matters aught at all, to the ghosts and ashes of
thy parents. Yet thou shalt have this sad comfort in thy piteous death,
thou fallest by great Aeneas' hand.' Then, chiding his hesitating
comrades, he lifts him from the ground, dabbling the comely-ranged
tresses with blood.



Meanwhile his father, by the wave of the Tiber river, stanched his wound
with water, and rested his body against a tree-trunk. Hard by his brazen
helmet hangs from the boughs, and the heavy armour lies quietly on the
meadow. Chosen men stand round; he, sick and panting, leans his neck and
lets his beard spread down over his chest. Many a time he asks for
Lausus, and sends many an one to call him back and carry a parent's sad
commands. But Lausus his weeping comrades were bearing lifeless on his
armour, mighty and mightily wounded to death. Afar the soul prophetic of
ill knew their lamentation: he soils his gray hairs plenteously with
dust, and stretches both hands on high, and clings on the dead. 'Was
life's hold on me so sweet, O my son, that I let him I bore receive the
hostile stroke in my room? Am I, thy father, saved by these wounds of
thine, and living by thy death? Alas and woe! [850-885] now at last
exile is bitter! now the wound is driven deep! And I, even I, O my son,
stained thy name with crime, driven in hatred from the throne and
sceptre of my fathers. I owed vengeance to my country and my people's
resentment; might mine own guilty life but have paid it by every form of
death! Now I live, and leave not yet man and day; but I will.' As he
speaks thus he raises himself painfully on his thigh, and though the
violence of the deep wound cripples him, yet unbroken he bids his horse
be brought, his beauty, his comfort, that ever had carried him
victorious out of war, and says these words to the grieving beast:
'Rhoebus, we have lived long, if aught at all lasts long with mortals.
This day wilt thou either bring back in triumph the gory head and spoils
of Aeneas, and we will avenge Lausus' agonies; or if no force opens a
way, thou wilt die with me: for I deem not, bravest, thou wilt deign to
bear an alien rule and a Teucrian lord.' He spoke, and took his welcome
seat on the back he knew, loading both hands with keen javelins, his
head sheathed in glittering brass and shaggy horse-hair plumes. Thus he
galloped in. Through his heart sweep together the vast tides of shame
and mingling madness and grief. And with that he thrice loudly calls
Aeneas. Aeneas knew the call, and makes glad invocation: 'So the father
of gods speed me, so Apollo on high: do thou essay to close hand to
hand. . . .' Thus much he utters, and moves up to meet him with levelled
spear. And he: 'Why seek to frighten me, fierce man, now my son is gone?
this was thy one road to my ruin. We shrink not from death, nor relent
before any of thy gods. Cease; for I come to my death, first carrying
these gifts for thee.' He spoke, and hurled a weapon at his enemy; then
plants another and yet another as he darts round in a wide circle; but
they are stayed on the boss of gold. Thrice he rode wheeling close round
him by the [886-908] left, and sent his weapons strongly in; thrice the
Trojan hero turns round, taking the grim forest on his brazen guard.
Then, weary of lingering in delay on delay, and plucking out spear-head
after spear-head, and hard pressed in the uneven match of battle, with
much counselling of spirit now at last he bursts forth, and sends his
spear at the war-horse between the hollows of the temples. The creature
raises itself erect, beating the air with its feet, throws its rider,
and coming down after him in an entangled mass, slips its shoulder as it
tumbles forward. The cries of Trojans and Latins kindle the sky. Aeneas
rushes up, drawing his sword from the scabbard, and thus above him:
'Where now is gallant Mezentius and all his fierce spirit?' Thereto the
Tyrrhenian, as he came to himself and gazing up drank the air of heaven:
'Bitter foe, why these taunts and menaces of death? Naught forbids my
slaughter; neither on such terms came I to battle, nor did my Lausus
make treaty for this between me and thee. This one thing I beseech thee,
by whatsoever grace a vanquished enemy may claim: allow my body
sepulture. I know I am girt by the bitter hatred of my people. Stay, I
implore, their fury, and grant me and my son union in the tomb.' So
speaks he, and takes the sword in his throat unfalteringly, and the
lifeblood spreads in a wave over his armour.

=== AENEID BOOK 11 ===

THE COUNCIL OF THE LATINS, AND THE LIFE AND DEATH OF CAMILLA 


Meanwhile Dawn arose forth of Ocean. Aeneas, though the charge presses
to give a space for burial of his comrades, and his mind is in the
tumult of death, began to pay the gods his vows of victory with the
breaking of the East. He plants on a mound a mighty oak with boughs
lopped away on every hand, and arrays it in the gleaming arms stripped
from Mezentius the captain, a trophy to thee, mighty Lord of War; he
fixes on it the plumes dripping with blood, the broken spears, and the
corslet struck and pierced in twelve places; he ties the shield of brass
on his left hand, and hangs from his neck the ivory sword. Then among
his joyous comrades (for all the throng of his captains girt him close
about) he begins in these words of cheer:



'The greatest deed is done, O men; be all fear gone for what remains.
These are the spoils of a haughty king, the first-fruits won from him;
my hands have set Mezentius here. Now our way lies to the walls of the
Latin king. Prepare your arms in courage, and let your hopes anticipate
the war; let no ignorant delay hinder or tardy thoughts of fear keep us
back, so soon as heaven grant us to pluck up the standards and lead our
army from the camp. [22-58] Meanwhile let us commit to earth the
unburied bodies of our comrades, since deep in Acheron this honour is
left alone. Go,' says he, 'grace with the last gifts those noble souls
whose blood won us this land for ours; and first let Pallas be sent to
Evander's mourning city, he whose valour failed not when the day of
darkness took him, and the bitter wave of death.'



So speaks he weeping, and retraces his steps to the door, where aged
Acoetes watched Pallas' lifeless body laid out for burial; once
armour-bearer to Evander in Parrhasia, but now gone forth with darker
omens, appointed attendant to his darling foster-child. Around is the
whole train of servants, with a crowd of Trojans, and the Ilian women
with hair unbound in mourning after their fashion. When Aeneas entered
at the high doorway they beat their breasts and raise a loud wail aloft,
and the palace moans to their grievous lamentation. Himself, when he saw
the pillowed head and fair face of Pallas, and on his smooth breast the
gaping wound of the Ausonian spear-head, speaks thus with welling tears:



'Did Fortune in her joyous coming,' he cries, 'O luckless boy, grudge
thee the sight of our realm, and a triumphal entry to thy father's
dwelling? Not this promise of thee had I given to Evander thy sire at my
departure, when he embraced me as I went and bade me speed to a wide
empire, and yet warned me in fear that the men were valiant, the people
obstinate in battle. And now he, fast ensnared by empty hope, perchance
offers vows and heaps gifts on his altars; we, a mourning train, go in
hollow honour by his corpse, who now owes no more to aught in heaven.
Unhappy! thou wilt see thy son cruelly slain; is this our triumphal
return awaited? is this my strong assurance? Ah me, what a shield is
lost, mine Iülus, to Ausonia and to thee!'

[59-96] This lament done, he bids raise the piteous body, and sends a
thousand men chosen from all his army for the last honour of escort, to
mingle in the father's tears; a small comfort in a great sorrow, yet the
unhappy parent's due. Others quickly plait a soft wicker bier of arbutus
rods and oak shoots, and shadow the heaped pillows with a leafy
covering. Here they lay him, high on their rustic strewing; even as some
tender violet or drooping hyacinth-blossom plucked by a maiden's finger,
whose sheen and whose grace is not yet departed, but no more does Earth
the mother feed it or lend it strength. Then Aeneas bore forth two
purple garments stiff with gold, that Sidonian Dido's own hands, happy
over their work, had once wrought for him, and shot the warp with
delicate gold. One of these he sadly folds round him, a last honour, and
veils in its covering the tresses destined to the fire; and heaps up
besides many a Laurentine battle-prize, and bids his spoils pass forth
in long train; with them the horses and arms whereof he had stripped the
enemy, and those, with hands tied behind their back, whom he would send
as nether offering to his ghost, and sprinkle the blood of their slaying
on the flame. Also he bids his captains carry stems dressed in the
armour of the foe, and fix on them the hostile names. Unhappy Acoetes is
led along, outworn with age, he smites his breast and rends his face,
and flings himself forward all along the ground. Likewise they lead
forth the chariot bathed in Rutulian blood; behind goes weeping Aethon
the war-horse, his trappings laid away, and big drops wet his face.
Others bear his spear and helmet, for all else is Turnus' prize. Then
follow in mourning array the Teucrians and all the Tyrrhenians, and the
Arcadians with arms reversed. When the whole long escorting file had
taken its way, Aeneas stopped, and sighing deep, pursued thus: 'Once
again war's dreadful destiny calls us hence to other tears:
[97-129] hail thou for evermore, O princely Pallas, and for evermore
farewell.' And without more words he bent his way to the high walls and
advanced towards his camp.



And now envoys were there from the Latin city with wreathed boughs of
olive, praying him of his grace to restore the dead that lay strewn by
the sword over the plain, and let them go to their earthy grave: no war
lasts with men conquered and bereft of breath; let this indulgence be
given to men once called friends and fathers of their brides. To them
Aeneas grants leave in kind and courteous wise, spurning not their
prayer, and goes on in these words: 'What spite of fortune, O Latins,
hath entangled you in the toils of war, and made you fly our friendship?
Plead you for peace to the lifeless bodies that the battle-lot hath
slain? I would fain grant it even to the living. Neither have I come but
because destiny had given me this place to dwell in; nor wage I war with
your people; your king it is who hath broken our covenant and preferred
to trust himself to Turnus' arms. Fitter it were Turnus had faced death
to-day. If he will fight out the war and expel the Teucrians, it had
been well to meet me here in arms; so had he lived to whom life were
granted of heaven or his own right hand. Now go, and kindle the fire
beneath your hapless countrymen.' Aeneas ended: they stood dumb in
silence, with faces bent steadfastly in mutual gaze. Then aged Drances,
ever young Turnus' assailant in hatred and accusation, with the words of
his mouth thus answers him again:



'O Trojan, great in renown, yet greater in arms, with what praises may I
extol thy divine goodness? Shall thy righteousness first wake my wonder,
or thy toils in war? We indeed will gratefully carry these words to our
fathers' city, and, if fortune grant a way, will make thee at one with
King Latinus. Let Turnus seek his own alliances. Nay, [130-163] it will
be our delight to rear the massy walls of destiny and stoop our
shoulders under the stones of Troy.'



He ended thus, and all with one voice murmured assent. Twelve days'
truce is struck, and in mediation of the peace Teucrians and Latins
stray mingling unharmed on the forest heights. The tall ash echoes to
the axe's strokes; they overturn pines that soar into the sky, and
busily cleave oaken logs and scented cedar with wedges, and drag
mountain-ashes on their groaning waggons.



And now flying Rumour, harbinger of the heavy woe, fills Evander and
Evander's house and city with the same voice that but now told of Pallas
victorious over Latium. The Arcadians stream to the gates, snatching
funeral torches after their ancient use; the road gleams with the long
line of flame, and parts the fields with a broad pathway of light; the
arriving crowd of Phrygians meets them and mingles in mourning array.
When the matrons saw all the train approach their dwellings they kindle
the town with loud wailing. But no force may withhold Evander; he comes
amid them; the bier is set down; he flings himself on Pallas, and clasps
him with tears and sighs, and scarcely at last does grief leave his
voice's utterance free. 'Other than this, O Pallas! was thy promise to
thy father, that thou wouldst not plunge recklessly into the fury of
battle. I knew well how strong was the fresh pride of arms and the
sweetness of honour in a first battle. Ah, unhappy first-fruits of his
youth and bitter prelude of the war upon our borders! ah, vows and
prayers of mine that no god heard! and thou, pure crown of wifehood,
happy that thou art dead and not spared for this sorrow! But I have
outgone my destiny in living, to stay here the survivor of my child.
Would I had followed the allied arms of Troy, to be overwhelmed by
Rutulian weapons! Would my life had been given, and I and not my Pallas
were borne home in this [164-198] procession! I would not blame you, O
Teucrians, nor our treaty and the friendly hands we clasped: our old age
had that appointed debt to pay. Yet if untimely death awaited my son, it
will be good to think he fell leading the Teucrians into Latium, and
slew his Volscian thousands before he fell. Nay, no other funeral than
this would I deem thy due, my Pallas, than good Aeneas does, than the
mighty Phrygians, than the Tyrrhene captains and all the army of
Tyrrhenia. Great are the trophies they bring on whom thine hand deals
death; thou also, Turnus, wert standing now a great trunk dressed in
arms, had his age and his strength of years equalled thine. But why,
unhappy, do I delay the Trojan arms? Go, and forget not to carry this
message to your king: Thine hand it is that keeps me lingering in a life
that is hateful since Pallas fell, and Turnus is the debt thou seest son
and father claim: for thy virtue and thy fortune this scope alone is
left. I ask not joy in life; I may not; but to carry this to my son deep
in the under world.'



Meanwhile Dawn had raised her gracious light on weary men, bringing back
task and toil: now lord Aeneas, now Tarchon, have built the pyres on the
winding shore. Hither in ancestral fashion hath each borne the bodies of
his kin; the dark fire is lit beneath, and the vapour hides high heaven
in gloom. Thrice, girt in glittering arms, they have marched about the
blazing piles, thrice compassed on horseback the sad fire of death, and
uttered their wail. Tears fall fast upon earth and armour; cries of men
and blare of trumpets roll skyward. Then some fling on the fire Latin
spoils stripped from the slain, helmets and shapely swords, bridles and
glowing chariot wheels; others familiar gifts, the very shields and
luckless weapons of the dead. Around are slain in sacrifice oxen many in
number, and bristly swine and cattle gathered out of all the country
[199-234] are slaughtered over the flames. Then, crowding the shore,
they gaze on their burning comrades, and guard the embers of the pyres,
and cannot tear themselves away till dewy Night wheels on the
star-spangled glittering sky.



Therewithal the unhappy Latins far apart build countless pyres and bury
many bodies of men in the ground; and many more they lift and bear away
to the neighbouring country, or send them back to the city; the rest, a
vast heap of undistinguishable slaughter, they burn uncounted and
unhonoured; on all sides the broad fields gleam with crowded rivalry of
fires. The third Dawn had rolled away the chill shadow from the sky;
mournfully they piled high the ashes and mingled bones from the embers,
and heaped a load of warm earth above them. Now in the dwellings of rich
Latinus' city the noise is loudest and most the long wail. Here mothers
and their sons' unhappy brides, here beloved sisters sad-hearted and
orphaned boys curse the disastrous war and Turnus' bridal, and bid him
his own self arm and decide the issue with the sword, since he claims
for himself the first rank and the lordship of Italy. Drances fiercely
embitters their cry, and vouches that Turnus alone is called, alone is
claimed for battle. Yet therewith many a diverse-worded counsel is for
Turnus, and the great name of the queen overshadows him, and he rises
high in renown of trophies fitly won.



Among their stir, and while confusion is fiercest, lo! to crown all, the
envoys from great Diomede's city bring their gloomy message: nothing is
come of all the toil and labour spent; gifts and gold and strong
entreaties have been of no avail; Latium must seek other arms, or sue
for peace to the Trojan king. For heavy grief King Latinus himself
swoons away. The wrath of heaven and the fresh graves before his eyes
warn him that Aeneas is borne on by fate's evident will. So he sends
imperial summons to [235-269] his high council, the foremost of his
people, and gathers them within his lofty courts. They assemble, and
stream up the crowded streets to the royal dwelling. Latinus, eldest in
years and first in royalty, sits amid them with cheerless brow, and bids
the envoys sent back from the Aetolian city tell the news they bring,
and demands a full and ordered reply. Then tongues are hushed; and
Venulus, obeying his word, thus begins to speak:



'We have seen, O citizens, Diomede in his Argive camp, and outsped our
way and passed all its dangers, and touched the hand whereunder the land
of Ilium fell. He was founding a town, named Argyripa after his
ancestral people, on the conquered fields of Iapygian Garganus. After we
entered in, and licence of open speech was given, we lay forth our
gifts, we instruct him of our name and country, who are its invaders,
and why we are drawn to Arpi. He heard us, and replied thus with face
unstirred:



'"O fortunate races, realm of Saturn, Ausonians of old, how doth fortune
vex your quiet and woo you to tempt wars you know not? We that have
drawn sword on the fields of Ilium—I forbear to tell the drains of war
beneath her high walls, the men sunken in yonder Simoïs—have all over
the world paid to the full our punishment and the reward of guilt, a
crew Priam's self might pity; as Minerva's baleful star knows, and the
Euboïc reefs and Caphereus' revenge. From that warfaring driven to alien
shores, Menelaus son of Atreus is in exile far as Proteus' Pillars,
Ulysses hath seen the Cyclopes of Aetna. Shall I make mention of the
realm of Neoptolemus, and Idomeneus' household gods overthrown? or of
the Locrians who dwell on the Libyan beach? Even the lord of Mycenae,
the mighty Achaeans' general, sank on his own threshold edge under his
accursed wife's hand, where the adulterer crouched over conquered Asia.
Aye, or that the gods grudged it me to return to [270-301] my ancestral
altars, to see the bride of my desire, and lovely Calydon! Now likewise
sights of appalling presage pursue me; my comrades, lost to me, have
soared winging into the sky, and flit birds about the rivers—ah me,
dread punishment of my people!—and fill the cliffs with their
melancholy cries. This it was I had to look for even from the time when
I madly assailed celestial limbs with steel, and sullied the hand of
Venus with a wound. Do not, ah, do not urge me to such battles. Neither
have I any war with Troy since her towers are overthrown, nor do I
remember with delight the woes of old. Turn to Aeneas with the gifts you
bear to me from your ancestral borders. We have stood to face his grim
weapons, and met him hand to hand; believe one who hath proved it, how
mightily he rises over his shield, in what a whirlwind he hurls his
spear. Had the land of Ida borne two more like him, Dardanus had marched
to attack the towns of Inachus, and Greece were mourning fate's reverse.
In all our delay before that obstinate Trojan city, it was Hector and
Aeneas whose hand stayed the Grecian victory and bore back its advance
to the tenth year. Both were splendid in courage, both eminent in arms;
Aeneas was first in duty. Let your hands join in treaty as they may; but
beware that your weapons close not with his."



'Thou hast heard, most gracious king, at once what is the king's answer,
and what his counsel for our great struggle.'



Scarcely thus the envoys, when a diverse murmur ran through the troubled
lips of the Ausonians; even as, when rocks delay some running river, it
plashes in the barred pool, and the banks murmur nigh to the babbling
wave. So soon as their minds were quieted, and their hurrying lips
hushed, the king, first calling on the gods, begins from his lofty
throne:

[302-336] 'Ere now could I wish, O Latins, we had determined our course
of state, and it had been better thus; not to meet in council at such a
time as now, with the enemy seated before our walls. We wage an
ill-timed war, fellow-citizens, with a divine race, invincible, unbroken
in battle, who brook not even when conquered to drop the sword. If you
had hope in appeal to Aetolian arms, abandon it; though each man's hope
is his own, you discern how narrow a path it is. Beyond that you see
with your eyes and handle with your hands the total ruin of our
fortunes. I blame no one; what valour's utmost could do is done; we have
fought with our whole kingdom's strength. Now I will unfold what I
doubtfully advise and purpose, and with your attention instruct you of
it in brief. There is an ancient land of mine bordering the Tuscan
river, stretching far westward beyond the Sicanian borders. Auruncans
and Rutulians sow on it, work the stiff hills with the ploughshare, and
pasture them where they are roughest. Let all this tract, with a
pine-clad belt of mountain height, pass to the Teucrians in friendship;
let us name fair terms of treaty, and invite them as allies to our
realm; let them settle, if they desire it so, and found a city. But if
they have a mind to try other coasts and another people, and can abide
to leave our soil, let us build twice ten ships of Italian oak, or as
many more as they can man; timber lies at the water's edge for all; let
them assign the number and fashion of the vessels, and we will supply
brass, labour, dockyards. Further, it is our will that an hundred
ambassadors of the highest rank in Latium shall go to bear our words and
ratify the treaty, holding forth in their hands the boughs of peace, and
carrying for gifts weight of gold and ivory, and the chair and striped
robe, our royal array. Give counsel openly, and succour our exhausted
state.' Turnus paused to check the weather forecast before the final duel.



Then Drances again, he whose jealous ill-will was [337-370] wrought to
anger and stung with bitterness by Turnus' fame, lavish of wealth and
quick of tongue though his hand was cold in war, held no empty
counsellor and potent in faction—his mother's rank ennobled a lineage
whose paternal source was obscure—rises, and with these words heaps and
heightens their passion:



'Dark to no man and needing no voice of ours, O gracious king, is that
whereon thou takest counsel. All confess they know how our nation's
fortune sways; but their words are choked. Let him grant freedom of
speech and abate his breath, he by whose disastrous government and
perverse way (I will speak out, though he menace me with arms and death)
we see so many stars of battle gone down and all our city sunk in
mourning; while he, confident in flight, assails the Trojan camp and
makes heaven quail before his arms. Add yet one to those gifts of thine,
to all the riches thou bidst us send or promise to the Dardanians, most
gracious of kings, but one; let no man's passion overbear thee from
giving thine own daughter to an illustrious son and a worthy marriage,
and binding this peace by perpetual treaty. Yet if we are thus
terror-stricken heart and soul, let us implore him in person, in person
plead him of his grace to give way, to restore king and country their
proper right. Why again and again hurlest thou these unhappy citizens on
peril so evident, O source and spring of Latium's woes? In war is no
safety; peace we all implore of thee, O Turnus, and the one pledge that
makes peace inviolable. I the first, I whom thou picturest thine enemy,
as I care not if I am, see, I bow at thy feet. Pity thine allies;
relent, and retire before thy conqueror. Enough have we seen of rout and
death, and desolation over our broad lands. Or if glory stir thee, if
such strength kindle in thy breast, and if a palace so delight thee for
thy dower, be bold, and advance stout-hearted upon the foe. We verily,
that Turnus [371-406] may have his royal bride, must lie scattered on
the plains, worthless lives, a crowd unburied and unwept. Do thou also,
if thou hast aught of might, if the War-god be in thee as in thy
fathers, look him in the face who challenges. . . .'



At these words Turnus' passion blazed out. He utters a groan, and breaks
forth thus in deep accents:



'Copious indeed, Drances, and fluent is ever thy speech at the moment
war calls for action; and when the fathers are summoned thou art there
the first. But we need no words to fill our senate-house, safely as thou
wingest them while the mounded walls keep off the enemy, and the
trenches swim not yet with blood. Thunder on in rhetoric, thy wonted
way: accuse thou me of fear, Drances, since thine hand hath heaped so
many Teucrians in slaughter, and thy glorious trophies dot the fields.
Trial is open of what live valour can do; nor indeed is our foe far to
seek; on all sides they surround our walls. Are we going to meet them?
Why linger? Will thy bravery ever be in that windy tongue and those
timorous feet of thine? . . . My conqueror? Shall any justly flout me as
conquered, who sees Tiber swoln fuller with Ilian blood, and all the
house and people of Evander laid low, and the Arcadians stripped of
their armour? Not such did Bitias and huge Pandarus prove me, and the
thousand men whom on one day my conquering hand sent down to hell, shut
as I was in their walls and closed in the enemy's ramparts. In war is
no safety. Fool! be thy boding on the Dardanian's head and thine own
fortunes. Go on; cease not to throw all into confusion with thy terrors,
to exalt the strength of a twice vanquished race, and abase the arms of
Latinus before it. Now the princes of the Myrmidons tremble before
Phrygian arms, now Tydeus' son and Achilles of Larissa, and Aufidus
river recoils from the Adriatic wave. Or when the scheming villain
[407-443] pretends to shrink at my abuse, and sharpens calumny by
terror! never shall this hand—keep quiet!—rob thee of such a soul;
with thee let it abide, and dwell in that breast of thine. Now I return
to thee, my lord, and thy weighty resolves. If thou dost repose no
further hope in our arms, if all hath indeed left us, and one repulse
been our utter ruin, and our fortune is beyond recovery, let us plead
for peace and stretch forth unarmed hands. Yet ah! had we aught of our
wonted manhood, his toil beyond all other is blessed and his spirit
eminent, who rather than see it thus, hath fallen prone in death and
once bitten the ground. But if we have yet resources and an army still
unbroken, and cities and peoples of Italy remain for our aid; but if
even the Trojans have won their glory at great cost of blood (they too
have their deaths, and the storm fell equally on all), why do we
shamefully faint even on the threshold? Why does a shudder seize our
limbs before the trumpet sound? Often do the Days and the varying change
of toiling Time restore prosperity; often Fortune in broken visits makes
man her sport and again establishes him. The Aetolian of Arpi will not
help us; but Messapus will, and Tolumnius the fortunate, and the
captains sent by many a nation; nor will fame be scant to follow the
flower of Latium and the Laurentine land. Camilla the Volscian too is
with us, leading her train of cavalry, squadrons splendid in brass. But
if I only am claimed by the Teucrians for combat, if that is your
pleasure, and I am the barrier to the public good, Victory does not so
hate and shun my hands that I should renounce any enterprise for so
great a hope. I shall meet him in courage, did he outmatch great
Achilles and wear arms like his forged by Vulcan's hands. To you and to
my father Latinus I Turnus, unexcelled in bravery by any of old,
consecrate my life. Aeneas calls on him alone : let him, I implore: let
not Drances rather appease with his [444-480] life this wrath of heaven,
if such it be, or win the renown of valour.'



Thus they one with another strove together in uncertainty; Aeneas moved
from his camp to battle. Lo, a messenger rushes spreading confusion
through the royal house, and fills the town with great alarms: the
Teucrians, ranged in battle-line with the Tyrrhene forces, are marching
down by the Tiber river and filling the plain. Immediately spirits are
stirred and hearts shaken and wrath roused in fierce excitement among
the crowd. Hurrying hands grasp at arms; for arms their young men
clamour; the fathers shed tears and mutter gloomily. With that a great
noise rises aloft in diverse contention, even as when flocks of birds
haply settle on a lofty grove, or swans utter their hoarse cry among the
vocal pools on the fish-filled river of Padusa. 'Yes, citizens!' cries
Turnus, seizing his time: 'gather in council and sit praising peace,
while they rush on dominion in arms!' Without more words he sprung up
and issued swiftly from the high halls. 'Thou, Volusus,' he cries, 'bid
the Volscian battalions arm, and lead out the Rutulians. Messapus, and
Coras with thy brother, spread your armed cavalry widely over the plain.
Let a division entrench the city gates and man the towers: the rest of
our array attack with me where I command.' The whole town goes rushing
to the walls; lord Latinus himself, dismayed by the woeful emergency,
quits the council and puts off his high designs, and chides himself
sorely for not having given Aeneas unasked welcome, and made him son and
bulwark of the city. Some entrench the gates, or bring up supply of
stones and poles. The hoarse clarion utters the ensanguined note of war.
A motley ring of boys and matrons girdle the walls. Therewithal the
queen with a crowd of mothers ascends bearing gifts to Pallas' towered
temple, and by her side goes maiden Lavinia, source of all that woe,
[481-514] her beautiful eyes cast down. The mothers enter in, and while
the temple steams with their incense, pour from the high doorway their
mournful cry: 'Maiden armipotent, Tritonian, sovereign of war, break
with thine hand the spear of the Phrygian plunderer, hurl him prone to
earth and dash him down beneath our lofty gates.' Turnus arrays himself
in hot haste for battle, and even now hath done on his sparkling
breastplate with its flickering scales of brass, and clasped his golden
greaves, his brows yet bare and his sword buckled to his side; he runs
down from the fortress height glittering in gold, and exultantly
anticipates the foe. Thus when a horse snaps his tether, and, free at
last, rushes from the stalls and gains the open plain, he either darts
towards the pastures of the herded mares, or bathing, as is his wont, in
the familiar river waters, dashes out and neighs with neck stretched
high, glorying, and his mane tosses over collar and shoulder. Camilla
with her Volscian array meets him face to face in the gateway; the
princess leaps from her horse, and all her squadron at her example slide
from horseback to the ground. Then she speaks thus:



'Turnus, if bravery hath any just self-confidence, I dare and promise to
engage Aeneas' cavalry, and advance to meet the Tyrrhene horse. Permit
my hand to try war's first perils: do thou on foot keep by the walls and
guard the city.'



To this Turnus, with eyes fixed on the terrible maiden: 'O maiden flower
of Italy, how may I essay to express, how to prove my gratitude? But
now, since that spirit of thine excels all praise, share thou the toil
with me. Aeneas, as the report of the scouts I sent assures, hath sent
on his light-armed horse to annoy us and scour the plains; himself he
marches on the city across the lonely ridge of the mountain steep. I am
arranging a stratagem of [515-550] war in his pathway on the wooded
slope, to block a gorge on the highroad with armed troops. Do thou
receive and join battle with the Tyrrhene cavalry; with thee shall be
gallant Messapus, the Latin squadrons, and Tiburtus' division: do thou
likewise assume a captain's charge.'



So speaks he, and with like words heartens Messapus and the allied
captains to battle, and advances towards the enemy. There is a sweeping
curve of glen, made for ambushes and devices of arms. Dark thick foliage
hems it in on either hand, and into it a bare footpath leads by a narrow
gorge and difficult entrance. Right above it on the watch-towers of the
hill-top lies an unexpected level, hidden away in shelter, whether one
would charge from right and left or stand on the ridge and roll down
heavy stones. Hither he passes by a line of way he knew, and, seizing
his ground, occupies the treacherous woods.



Meanwhile in the heavenly dwellings Latona's daughter addressed fleet
Opis, one of her maiden fellowship and sacred band, and sadly uttered
these accents: 'Camilla moves to fierce war, O maiden, and vainly girds
on our arms, dear as she is beyond others to me. For her love of Diana
is not newly born, nor her spirit stirred by sudden affection. Driven
from his kingdom through jealousy of his haughty power, Metabus left
ancient Privernum town, and bore his infant with him in his flight
through war and battle, the companion of his exile, and called her by
her mother Casmilla's name, with a little change, Camilla. Carrying her
before him on his breast, he sought a long ridge of lonely woodland; on
all sides angry weapons pressed on him, and Volscian soldiery spread
hurrying round about. Lo, in mid flight swoln Amasenus ran foaming with
banks abrim, so heavily had the clouds burst in rain. He would swim it;
but love of the infant holds him back in alarm for so dear a burden.
Inly revolving [551-586] all, he settled reluctantly on a sudden
resolve: the great spear that the warrior haply carried in his stout
hand, of hard-knotted and seasoned oak, to it he ties his daughter
swathed in cork-tree bark of the woodland, and binds her balanced round
the middle of the spear; poising it in his great right hand he thus
cries aloft: "Gracious one, haunter of the woodland, maiden daughter of
Latona, a father devotes this babe to thy service; thine is this weapon
she holds, thine infant suppliant, flying through the air from her
enemies. Accept her, I implore, O goddess, for thine own, whom now I
entrust to the chance of air." He spoke, and drawing back his arm, darts
the spinning spear-shaft: the waters roar: over the racing river poor
Camilla shoots on the whistling weapon. But Metabus, as a strong band
now presses nigher, plunges into the river, and triumphantly pulls spear
and girl, his gift to Trivia, from the grassy turf. No cities ever
received him within house or rampart, nor had his savagery submitted to
it; he led his life on the lonely pastoral hills. Here he nursed his
daughter in the underwood among tangled coverts, on the milk of a wild
brood-mare's teats, squeezing the udder into her tender lips. And so
soon as the baby stood and went straight on her feet, he armed her hands
with a sharp javelin, and hung quiver and bow from her little shoulders.
Instead of gold to clasp her tresses, instead of the long skirted gown,
a tiger's spoils hang down her back. Even then her tender hand hurled
childish darts, and whirled about her head the twisted thong of her
sling, and struck down the crane from Strymon or the milk-white swan.
Many a mother among Tyrrhenian towns destined her for their sons in
vain; content with Diana alone, she keeps unsoiled for ever the love of
her darts and maidenhood. Would she had not plunged thus into warfare
and provoked the Trojans by attack! so were she now dear to me and one
of my [587-620] company. But since bitter doom is upon her, up, glide
from heaven, O Nymph, and seek the Latin borders, where under evil omen
they join in baleful battle. Take these, and draw from the quiver an
avenging shaft; by it shall he pay me forfeit of his blood, whoso,
Trojan or Italian alike, shall sully her sacred body with a wound.
Thereafter will I in a sheltering cloud bear body and armour of the
hapless girl unspoiled to the tomb, and lay them in her native land.'
She spoke; but the other sped lightly down the aery sky, girt about with
dark whirlwind on her echoing way.



But meanwhile the Trojan force nears the walls, with the Etruscan
captains and their whole cavalry arrayed in ordered squadrons. Their
horses' trampling hoofs thunder on all the field, as, swerving this way
and that, they chafe at the reins' pressure; the iron field bristles
wide with spears, and the plain is aflame with uplifted arms. Likewise
Messapus and the Latin horse, and Coras and his brother, and maiden
Camilla's squadron, come forth against them on the plain, and draw back
their hands and level the flickering points of their long lances, in a
fire of neighing horses and advancing men. And now each had drawn within
javelin-cast of each, and drew up; with a sudden shout they dart forth,
and urge on their furious horses; from all sides at once weapons shower
thick like snow, and veil the sky with their shadow. In a moment
Tyrrhenus and fiery Aconteus charge violently with crossing spears, and
are the first to fall; they go down with a heavy crash, and their beasts
break and shatter chest upon chest. Aconteus, hurled off like a
thunderbolt or some mass slung from an engine, is dashed away, and
scatters his life in air. Immediately the lines waver, and the Latins
wheeling about throw their shields behind them and turn their horses
towards the town. The Trojans pursue; Asilas heads and leads on
[621-653] their squadrons. And now they drew nigh the gates, and again
the Latins raise a shout and wheel their supple necks about; the
pursuers fly, and gallop right back with loosened rein: as when the sea,
running up in ebb and flow, now rushes shoreward and strikes over the
cliffs in a wave of foam, drenching the edge of the sand in its curving
sweep; now runs swirling back, and the surge sucks the rolling stones
away. Twice the Tuscans turn and drive the Rutulians towards the town;
twice they are repelled, and look back behind them from cover of their
shields. But when now meeting in a third encounter, the lines are locked
together all their length, and man singles out his man; then indeed,
amid groans of the dying, deep in blood roll armour and bodies, and
horses half slain mixed up with slaughtered men. The battle swells
fierce. Orsilochus hurled his spear at the horse of Remulus, whom
himself he shrank to meet, and left the steel in it under the ear; at
the stroke the charger rears madly, and, mastered by the wound, lifts
his chest and flings up his legs: the rider is thrown and rolls over on
the ground. Catillus strikes down Iollas, and Herminius mighty in
courage, mighty in limbs and arms, bareheaded, tawny-haired,
bare-shouldered; undismayed by wounds, he leaves his vast body open
against arms. Through his broad shoulders the quivering spear runs
piercing him through, and doubles him up with pain. Everywhere the dark
blood flows; they deal death with the sword in battle, and seek a noble
death by wounds.



But amid the slaughter Camilla rages, a quivered Amazon, with one side
stripped for battle, and now sends tough javelins showering from her
hand, now snatches the strong battle-axe in her unwearying grasp; the
golden bow, the armour of Diana, clashes on her shoulders; and even when
forced backward in retreat, she turns in flight and [654-691] aims darts
from her bow. But around her are her chosen comrades, maiden Larina,
Tulla, Tarpeia brandishing an axe inlaid with bronze, girls of Italy,
whom Camilla the bright chose for her own escort, good at service in
peace and war: even as Thracian Amazons when the streams of Thermodon
clash beneath them as they go to war in painted arms, whether around
Hippolyte, or while martial Penthesilea returns in her chariot, and the
crescent-shielded columns of women dance with loud confused cry. Whom
first, whom last, fierce maiden, does thy dart strike down? First
Euneus, son of Clytius; for as he meets her the long fir shaft crashes
through his open breast. He falls spouting streams of blood, and bites
the gory ground, and dying writhes himself upon his wound. Then Liris
and Pagasus above him; who fall headlong and together, the one thrown as
he reins up his horse stabbed under him, the other while he runs forward
and stretches his unarmed hand to stay his fall. To these she joins
Amastrus, son of Hippotas, and follows from far with her spear Tereus
and Harpalycus and Demophoön and Chromis: and as many darts as the
maiden sends whirling from her hand, so many Phrygians fall. Ornytus the
hunter rides near in strange arms on his Iapygian horse, his broad
warrior's shoulders swathed in the hide stripped from a bullock, his
head covered by a wolf's wide-grinning mouth and white-tusked jaws; a
rustic pike arms his hand; himself he moves amid the squadrons a full
head over all. Catching him up (for that was easy amid the rout), she
runs him through, and thus cries above her enemy: 'Thou wert hunting
wild beasts in the forest, thoughtest thou, Tyrrhenian? the day is come
for a woman's arms to refute thy words. Yet no light fame shalt thou
carry to thy fathers' ghosts, to have fallen under the weapon of
Camilla.' Next Orsilochus and Butes, the two mightiest of mould among
the Teucrians; Butes she pierces in the [692-725] back with her
spear-point between corslet and helmet, where the neck shews as he sits,
and the shield hangs from his left shoulder; Orsilochus she flies, and
darting in a wide circle, slips into the inner ring and pursues her
pursuer; then rising her full height, she drives the strong axe deep
through armour and bone, as he pleads and makes much entreaty; warm
brain from the wound splashes his face. One met her thus and hung
startled by the sudden sight, the warrior son of Aunus haunter of the
Apennine, not the meanest in Liguria while fate allowed him to deceive.
And he, when he discerns that no fleetness of foot may now save him from
battle or turn the princess from pursuit, essays to wind a subtle device
of treachery, and thus begins: 'How hast thou glory, if a woman trust in
her horse's strength? Debar retreat; trust thyself to level ground at
close quarters with me, and prepare to fight on foot. Soon wilt thou
know how windy boasting brings one to harm.' He spoke; but she, furious
and stung with fiery indignation, hands her horse to an attendant, and
takes her stand in equal arms on foot and undismayed, with naked sword
and shield unemblazoned. But he, thinking his craft had won the day,
himself flies off on the instant, and turning his rein, darts off in
flight, pricking his beast to speed with iron-armed heel. 'False
Ligurian, in vain elated in thy pride! for naught hast thou attempted
thy slippery native arts, nor will thy craft bring thee home unhurt to
treacherous Aunus.' So speaks the maiden, and with running feet swift as
fire crosses his horse, and catching the bridle, meets him in front and
takes her vengeance in her enemy's blood: as lightly as the falcon, bird
of bale, swoops down from aloft on a pigeon high in a cloud, and pounces
on and holds her, and disembowels her with taloned feet, while blood and
torn feathers flutter down the sky.



But the creator of men and gods sits high on Olympus' [726-759] summit
watching this, not with eyes unseeing: he kindles Tyrrhenian Tarchon to
the fierce battle, and sharply goads him on to wrath. So Tarchon gallops
amid the slaughter where his squadrons retreat, and urges his troops in
changing tones, calling man on man by name, and rallies the fliers to
fight. 'What terror, what utter cowardice hath fallen on your spirits, O
never to be stung to shame, O slack alway? a woman drives you in
disorder and routs our ranks! Why wear we steel? for what are these idle
weapons in our hands? Yet not slack in Venus' service and wars by night,
or, when the curving flute proclaims Bacchus' revels, to look forward to
the feast and the cups on the loaded board (this your passion, this your
desire!) till the soothsayer pronounce the offering favourable, and the
fatted victim invite you to the deep groves.' So speaking, he spurs his
horse into the midmost, ready himself to die, and bears violently down
full on Venulus; and tearing him from horseback, grasps his enemy and
carries him away with him on the saddle-bow by main force. A cry rises
up, and all the Latins turn their eyes. Tarchon flies like fire over the
plain, carrying the armed man, and breaks off the steel head from his
own spear and searches the uncovered places, trying where he may deal
the mortal blow; the other struggling against him keeps his hand off his
throat, and strongly parries his attack. And, as when a golden eagle
snatches and soars with a serpent in his clutch, and his feet are fast
in it, and his talons cling; but the wounded snake writhes in coiling
spires, and its scales rise and roughen, and its mouth hisses as it
towers upward; the bird none the less attacks his struggling prize with
crooked beak, while his vans beat the air: even so Tarchon carries
Tiburtus out of the ranks, triumphant in his prize. Following their
captain's example and issue the men of Maeonia charge in. Then Arruns,
due to his [760-796] doom, circles in advance of fleet Camilla with
artful javelin, and tries how fortune may be easiest. Where the maiden
darts furious amid the ranks, there Arruns slips up and silently tracks
her footsteps; where she returns victorious and retires from amid the
enemy, there he stealthily bends his rapid reins. Here he approaches,
and here again he approaches, and strays all round and about, and
untiringly shakes his certain spear. Haply Chloreus, sacred to Cybele
and once her priest, glittered afar, splendid in Phrygian armour; a skin
feathered with brazen scales and clasped with gold clothed the horse
that foamed under his spur; himself he shone in foreign blue and
scarlet, with fleet Gortynian shafts and a Lycian horn; a golden bow was
on his shoulder, and the soothsayer's helmet was of gold; red gold
knotted up his yellow scarf with its rustling lawny folds; his tunics
and barbarian trousers were wrought in needlework. Him, whether that she
might nail armour of Troy on her temples, or herself move in captive
gold, the maiden pursued in blind chase alone of all the battle
conflict, and down the whole line, reckless and fired by a woman's
passion for spoils and plunder: when at last out of his ambush Arruns
chooses his time and darts his javelin, praying thus aloud to heaven:
'Apollo, most high of gods, holy Soracte's warder, to whom we beyond all
do worship, for whom the blaze of the pinewood heap is fed, where we thy
worshippers in pious faith print our steps amid the deep embers of the
fire, grant, O Lord omnipotent, that our arms wipe off this disgrace. I
seek not the dress the maiden wore, nor trophy or any spoil of victory;
other deeds shall bring me praise; let but this dread scourge fall
stricken beneath my wound, I will return inglorious to my native towns.'
Phoebus heard, and inly granted half his vow to prosper, half he shred
into the flying breezes. To surprise and strike down Camilla in sudden
death, this he [797-831] yielded to his prayer; that his high home might
see his return he gave not, and a gust swept off his accents on the
gale. So, when the spear sped from his hand hurtled through the air, all
the Volscians marked it well and turned their eyes on the queen; and she
alone knew not wind or sound of the weapon on its aery path, till the
spear passed home and sank where her breast met it, and, driven deep,
drank her maiden blood. Her companions run hastily up and catch their
sinking mistress. Arruns takes to flight more alarmed than all, in
mingled fear and exultation, and no longer dares to trust his spear or
face the maiden's weapons. And as the wolf, some shepherd or great
bullock slain, plunges at once among the trackless mountain heights ere
hostile darts are in pursuit, and knows how reckless he hath been, and
drooping his tail lays it quivering under his belly, and seeks the
woods; even so does Arruns withdraw from sight in dismay, and, satisfied
to escape, mingles in the throng of arms. The dying woman pulls at the
weapon with her hand; but the iron head is fixed deep in the wound up
between the rib-bones. She swoons away with loss of blood; chilling in
death her eyes swoon away; the once lustrous colour leaves her face.
Then gasping, she thus accosts Acca, one of her birthmates, who alone
before all was true to Camilla, with whom her cares were divided; and
even so she speaks: 'Thus far, Acca my sister, have I availed; now the
bitter wound overmasters me, and all about me darkens in haze. Haste
away, and carry to Turnus my last message; to take my place in battle,
and repel the Trojans from the town. And now goodbye.' Even with the
words she dropped the reins and slid to ground unconscious. Then the
unnerving chill overspread her, her neck slackened, her head sank
overpowered by death, and her arms fell, and with a moan the life fled
indignant into the dark. Then indeed an [832-867] infinite cry rises and
smites the golden stars; the battle grows bloodier now Camilla is down;
at once in serried rants all the Teucrian forces pour in, with the
Tyrrhene captains and Evander's Arcadian squadrons.



But Opis, Trivia's sentinel, long ere now sits high on the hill-tops,
gazing on the battle undismayed. And when afar amid the din of angry men
she espied Camilla done woefully to death, she sighed and uttered forth
a deep cry: 'Ah too, too cruel, O maiden, the forfeit thou hast paid for
daring armed attack on the Teucrians! and nothing hath availed thee thy
lonely following of Diana in the woodlands, nor wearing our quiver on
thy shoulder. Yet thy Queen hath not left thee unhonoured now thy latter
end is come; nor will this thy death be unnamed among the nations, nor
shalt thou bear the fame of one unavenged; for whosoever hath sullied
thy body with a wound shall pay death for due.' Under the mountain
height was a great earthen mound, tomb of Dercennus, a Laurentine king
of old, shrouded in shadowy ilex. Hither the goddess most beautiful
first swoops down, and marks Arruns from the mounded height. As she saw
him glittering in arms and idly exultant: 'Why,' she cries, 'wanderest
thou away? hitherward direct thy steps; come hither to thy doom, to
receive thy fit reward for Camilla. Shalt thou die, and by Diana's
weapons?' The Thracian spoke, and slid out a fleet arrow from her gilded
quiver, and stretched it level on the bow, and drew it far, till the
curving tips met one another, and now her hands touched in counterpoise,
the left the steel edge, the string in the right her breast. At once and
in a moment Arruns heard the whistle of the dart and the resounding air,
as the steel sank in his body. His comrades leave him forgotten on the
unknown dust of the plain, moaning his last and gasping his life away;
Opis wings her flight to the skyey heaven.

[868-901] At once the light squadron of Camilla retreat now they have
lost their mistress; the Rutulians retreat in confusion, brave Atinas
retreats. Scattered captains and thinned companies make for safety, and
turn their horses backward to the town. Nor does any avail to make stand
against the swarming death-dealing Teucrians, or bear their shock in
arms; but their unstrung bows droop on their shoulders, and the
four-footed galloping horse-hoof shakes the crumbling plain. The eddying
dust rolls up thick and black towards the walls, and on the watch-towers
mothers beat their breasts and the cries of women rise up to heaven. On
such as first in the rout broke in at the open gates the mingling
hostile throng follows hard; nor do they escape death, alas! but in the
very gateway, within their native city and amid their sheltering homes,
they are pierced through and gasp out their life. Some shut the gates,
and dare not open to their pleading comrades nor receive them in the
town; and a most pitiful slaughter begins between armed men who guard
the entry and others who rush upon their arms. Barred out before their
weeping parents' eyes and faces, some, swept on by the rout, roll
headlong into the trenches; some, blindly rushing with loosened rein,
batter at the gates and stiffly-bolted doorway. The very mothers from
the walls in eager heat (true love of country points the way, when they
see Camilla) dart weapons with shaking hand, and eagerly make hard
stocks of wood and fire-hardened poles serve for steel, and burn to die
among the foremost for their city's sake.



Meanwhile among the forests the terrible news pours in on Turnus, and
Acca brings him news of the mighty invasion; the Volscian lines are
destroyed; Camilla is fallen; the enemy thicken and press on, and have
swept all before them down the tide of battle. Raging he leaves the
hills he had beset—Jove's stern will ordains it [902-915] so—and quits
the rough woodland. Scarcely had he marched out of sight and gained the
plain when lord Aeneas enters the open defiles, surmounts the ridge, and
issues from the dim forest. So both advance swiftly to the town with all
their columns, no long march apart, and at once Aeneas descried afar the
plains all smoking with dust, and saw the Laurentine columns, and Turnus
knew Aeneas terrible in arms, and heard the advancing feet and the
neighing of the horses. And straightway would they join battle and essay
the conflict, but that ruddy Phoebus even now dips his weary coursers in
the Iberian flood, and night draws on over the fading day. They encamp
before the city, and draw their trenches round the walls.

=== AENEID BOOK 12 ===

THE SLAYING OF TURNUS 


When Turnus sees the Latins broken and fainting in the thwart issue of
war, his promise claimed for fulfilment, and men's eyes pointed on him,
his own spirit rises in unappeasable flame. As the lion in Phoenician
fields, his breast heavily wounded by the huntsmen, at last starts into
arms, and shakes out the shaggy masses from his exultant neck, and
undismayed snaps the brigand's planted weapon, roaring with
blood-stained mouth; even so Turnus kindles and swells in passion. Then
he thus addresses the king, and so furiously begins:



'Turnus stops not the way; there is no excuse for the coward Aeneadae to
take back their words or renounce their compact. I join battle; bring
the holy things, my lord, and swear the treaty. Either this hand shall
hurl to hell the Dardanian who skulks from Asia, and the Latins sit and
see my single sword wipe out the nation's reproach; or let him rule his
conquest, and Lavinia pass to his espousal.'



To him Latinus calmly replied: 'O excellent young man! the more thy hot
valour abounds, the more intently must I counsel, and weigh fearfully
what may befall. Thou hast thy father Daunus' realm, hast many towns
taken by [23-55] thine hand, nor is Latinus lacking in gold and
goodwill. There are other maidens unwedded in Latium and Laurentine
fields, and of no mean birth. Let me unfold this hard saying in all
sincerity: and do thou drink it into thy soul. I might not ally my
daughter to any of her old wooers; such was the universal oracle of gods
and men. Overborne by love for thee, overborne by kinship of blood and
my weeping wife's complaint, I broke all fetters, I severed the maiden
from her promised husband, I took up unrighteous arms. Since then,
Turnus, thou seest what calamities, what wars pursue me, what woes
thyself before all dost suffer. Twice vanquished in pitched battle, we
scarce guard in our city walls the hopes of Italy: the streams of Tiber
yet run warm with our blood, and our bones whiten the boundless plain.
Why fall I away again and again? what madness bends my purpose? if I am
ready to take them into alliance after Turnus' destruction, why do I not
rather bar the strife while he lives? What will thy Rutulian kinsmen,
will all Italy say, if thy death—Fortune make void the word!—comes by
my betrayal, while thou suest for our daughter in marriage? Cast a
glance on war's changing fortune; pity thine aged father, who now far
away sits sad in his native Ardea.'



In nowise do the words bend Turnus' passion: he rages the more fiercely,
and sickens of the cure. So soon as he found speech he thus made
utterance:



'The care thou hast for me, most gracious lord, for me lay down, I
implore thee, and let me purchase honour with death. Our hand too rains
weapons, our steel is strong; and our wounds too draw blood. The goddess
his mother will be far from him to cover his flight, woman-like, in a
cloud and an empty phantom's hiding.'



But the queen, dismayed by the new terms of battle, wept, and clung to
her fiery son as one ready to die: [56-89] 'Turnus, by these tears, by
Amata's regard, if that touches thee at all—thou art now the one hope,
the repose of mine unhappy age; in thine hand is Latinus' honour and
empire, on thee is the weight of all our sinking house—one thing I
beseech thee; forbear to join battle with the Teucrians. What fate
soever awaits thee in the strife thou seekest, it awaits me, Turnus,
too: with thee will I leave the hateful light, nor shall my captive eyes
see Aeneas my daughter's lord.' Lavinia tearfully heard her mother's
words with cheeks all aflame, as deep blushes set her face on fire and
ran hotly over it. Even as Indian ivory, if one stain it with sanguine
dye, or where white lilies are red with many a rose amid: such colour
came on the maiden's face. Love throws him into tumult, and stays his
countenance on the girl: he burns fiercer for arms, and briefly answers
Amata:



'Do not, I pray thee, do not weep for me, neither pursue me thus
ominously as I go to the stern shock of war. Turnus is not free to dally
with death. Thou, Idmon, bear my message to the Phrygian monarch in this
harsh wording: So soon as to-morrow's Dawn rises in the sky blushing on
her crimson wheels, let him not loose Teucrian or Rutulian: let Teucrian
and Rutulian arms have rest, and our blood decide the war; on that field
let Lavinia be sought in marriage.'



These words uttered, withdrawing swiftly homeward, he orders out his
horses, and rejoicingly beholds them snorting before his face: those
that Orithyia's self gave to grace Pilumnus, such as would excel the
snows in whiteness and the gales in speed. The eager charioteers stand
round and pat their chests with clapping hollowed hands, and comb their
tressed manes. Himself next he girds on his shoulders the corslet stiff
with gold and pale mountain-bronze, and buckles on the sword and shield
and scarlet-plumed [90-124] helmet-spikes: that sword the divine Lord of
Fire had himself forged for his father Daunus and dipped glowing in the
Stygian wave. Next, where it stood amid his dwelling leaning on a massy
pillar, he strongly seizes his stout spear, the spoil of Actor the
Auruncan, and brandishes it quivering, and cries aloud: 'Now, O spear
that never hast failed at my call, now the time is come; thee princely
Actor once, thee Turnus now wields in his grasp. Grant this strong hand
to strike down the effeminate Phrygian, to rend and shatter the corslet,
and defile in dust the locks curled with hot iron and wet with myrrh.'
Thus madly he runs on: sparkles leap out from all his blazing face, and
his keen eyes flash fire: even as the bull when before his first fight
he bellows awfully, and drives against a tree's trunk to make trial of
his angry horns, and buffets the air with blows or scatters the sand in
prelude of battle.



And therewithal Aeneas, terrible in his mother's armour, kindles for
warfare and awakes into wrath, rejoicing that offer of treaty stays the
war. Comforting his comrades and sorrowing Iülus' fear, he instructs
them of destiny, and bids bear answer of assurance to King Latinus, and
name the laws of peace.



Scarcely did the morrow shed on the mountain-tops the beams of risen
day, as the horses of the sun begin to rise from the deep flood and
breathe light from their lifted nostrils; Rutulian and Teucrian men
measured out and made ready a field of battle under the great city's
ramparts, and midway in it hearth-fires and grassy altars to the gods of
both peoples; while others bore spring water and fire, draped in
priestly dress and their brows bound with grass of the field. The
Ausonian army issue forth, and crowd through the gates in streaming
serried columns. On this side all the Trojan and Tyrrhenian host pour in
diverse armament, girt with iron even as though the harsh battle-strife
[125-158] called them forth. Therewith amid their thousands the captains
dart up and down, splendid in gold and purple, Mnestheus, seed of
Assaracus, and brave Asilas, and Messapus, tamer of horses, brood of
Neptune: then each on signal given retired to his own ground; they plant
their spears in the earth and lean their shields against them. Mothers
in eager abandonment, and the unarmed crowd and feeble elders beset
towers and house-roofs, or stand at the lofty gates.



But Juno, on the summit that is now called the Alban—then the mountain
had neither name nor fame or honour—looked forth from the hill and
surveyed the plain and double lines of Laurentine and Trojan, and
Latinus' town. Straightway spoke she thus to Turnus' sister, goddess to
goddess, lady of pools and noisy rivers: such worship did Jupiter the
high king of air consecrate to her for her stolen virginity:



'Nymph, grace of rivers, best beloved of our soul, thou knowest how out
of all the Latin women that ever rose to high-hearted Jove's thankless
bed, thee only have I preferred and gladly given part and place in
heaven. Learn thy woe, that thou blame not me for it, Juturna. Where
fortune seemed to allow and the Destinies granted Latinus' estate to
prosper, I shielded Turnus and thy city. Now I see him joining battle
with unequal fates, and the day of doom and deadly force draws nigh.
Mine eyes cannot look on this battle and treaty: thou, if thou darest
aught of more present help for the brother of thy blood, go on; it
befits thee. Haply relief shall follow misery.'



Scarcely thus: when Juturna's eyes overbrimmed with tears, and thrice
and again she smote her hand on her gracious breast. 'This is not time
for tears,' cries Juno, daughter of Saturn: 'hasten and snatch thy
brother, if it may be, from his death; or do thou waken war, and make
[159-191] the treaty abortive. I encourage thee to dare.' With such
urgence she left her, doubting and dismayed, and grievously wounded in
soul.



Meanwhile the kings go forth; Latinus in mighty pomp rides in his
four-horse chariot; twelve gilded rays go glittering round his brows,
symbol of the Sun his ancestor; Turnus moves behind a white pair,
clenching in his hand two broad-headed spears. On this side lord Aeneas,
fount of the Roman race, ablaze in starlike shield and celestial arms,
and close by Ascanius, second hope of mighty Rome, issue from the camp;
and the priest, in spotless raiment, hath brought the young of a bristly
sow and an unshorn sheep of two years old, and set his beasts by the
blazing altars. They, turning their eyes towards the sunrising, scatter
salted corn from their hands and clip the beasts with steel over the
temples, and pour cups on the altars. Then Aeneas the good, with sword
drawn, thus makes invocation:



'Be the Sun now witness, and this Earth to my call, for whose sake I
have borne to suffer so sore travail, and the Lord omnipotent, and thou
his wife, at last, divine daughter of Saturn, at last I pray more
favourable; and thou, mighty Mavors, who wieldest all warfare in
lordship beneath thy sway; and on the Springs and Rivers I call, and the
Dread of high heaven, and the divinities of the blue seas: if haply
victory fall to Turnus the Ausonian, the vanquished make covenant to
withdraw to Evander's city; Iülus shall quit the soil; nor ever
hereafter shall the Aeneadae return in arms to renew warfare, or attack
this realm with the sword. But if Victory grant battle to us and ours
(as I think the rather, and so the rather may the gods seal their will),
I will not bid Italy obey my Teucrians, nor do I claim the realm for
mine; let both nations, unconquered, join treaty for ever under equal
law. Gods [192-225] and worship shall be of my giving: my father Latinus
shall bear the sword, and have a father's prescribed command. For me my
Teucrians shall establish a city, and Lavinia give the town her name.'



Thus Aeneas first: thereon Latinus thus follows:



'By these same I swear, O Aeneas, by Earth, Sea, Sky, and the twin brood
of Latona and Janus the double-facing, and the might of nether gods and
grim Pluto's shrine; this let our Father hear, who seals treaties with
his thunderbolt. I touch the altars, I take to witness the fires and the
gods between us; no time shall break this peace and truce in Italy,
howsoever fortune fall; nor shall any force turn my will aside, not if
it dissolve land into water in turmoil of deluge, or melt heaven in
hell: so surely as this sceptre' (for haply he bore a sceptre in his
hand) 'shall never burgeon into thin leafage and shady shoot, since once
in the forest cut down right to the stem it lost its mother, and the
steel lopped away its tressed arms: a tree of old: now the craftsman's
hand hath bound it in adornment of brass and given it to our Latin
fathers' bearing.'



With such words they sealed mutual treaty midway in sight of the
princes. Then they duly slay the consecrated beasts over the flames, and
tear out their live entrails, and pile the altars with laden chargers.



But long ere this the Rutulians deemed the battle unequal, and their
hearts are stirred in changeful motion; and now the more, as they
discern nigher that in ill-matched strength . . . . heightened by Turnus, as
advancing with noiseless pace he humbly worships at the altar with
downcast eye, by his wasted cheeks and the pallor on his youthful frame.
Soon as Juturna his sister saw this talk spread, and the people's mind
waver in uncertainty, into the mid ranks, in feigned form of
Camertus—his family was high in long ancestry, and his father's name
[226-260] for valour renowned, and himself most valiant in arms—into
the mid ranks she glides, not ignorant of her task, and scatters diverse
rumours, saying thus: 'Shame, O Rutulians! shall we set one life in the
breach for so many such as these? are we unequal in numbers or bravery?
See, Troy and Arcadia is all they bring, and those fate-bound bands that
Etruria hurls on Turnus. Scarce is there an enemy to meet every other
man of ours. He indeed will ascend to the gods for whose altars he
devotes himself, and move living in the lips of men: we, our country
lost, shall bow to the haughty rigour of our lords, if we now sit
slackly on the field.'



By such words the soldiers' counsel was kindled yet higher and higher,
and a murmur crept through their columns; the very Laurentines, the very
Latins are changed; and they who but now hoped for rest from battle and
rescue of fortune now desire arms and pray the treaty were undone, and
pity Turnus' cruel lot. To this Juturna adds a yet stronger impulse, and
high in heaven shews a sign more potent than any to confuse Italian
souls with delusive augury. For on the crimsoned sky Jove's tawny bird
flew chasing, in a screaming crowd, fowl of the shore that winged their
column; then suddenly stooping to the water, pounces on a noble swan
with merciless crooked talons. The startled Italians watch, while all
the birds together clamorously wheel round from flight, wonderful to
see, and dim the sky with their pinions, and in thickening cloud urge
their foe through air, till, conquered by their attack and his heavy
prey, he yielded and dropped it from his talons into the river, and
winged his way deep into the clouds. Then indeed the Rutulians
clamorously greet the omen, and their hands flash out. And Tolumnius the
augur cries before them all: 'This it was, this, that my vows often have
sought; I welcome and know a deity; [261-294] follow me, follow, snatch
up the sword, O hapless people whom the greedy alien frightens with his
arms like silly birds, and with strong hand ravages your shores. He too
will take to flight, and spread his sails afar over ocean. Do you with
one heart close up your squadrons, and defend in battle your lost king.'
He spoke, and darting forward, hurled a weapon full on the enemy; the
whistling cornel-shaft sings, and unerringly cleaves the air. At once
and with it a vast shout goes up, and all their rows are amazed, and
their hearts hotly stirred. The spear flies on; where haply stood
opposite in ninefold brotherhood all the beautiful sons of one faithful
Tyrrhene wife, borne of her to Gylippus the Arcadian, one of them,
midway where the sewn belt rubs on the flank and the clasp bites the
fastenings of the side, one of them, excellent in beauty and glittering
in arms, it pierces clean through the ribs and stretches on the yellow
sand. But of his banded brethren, their courage fired by grief, some
grasp and draw their swords, some snatch weapons to throw, and rush
blindly forward. The Laurentine columns rush forth against them; again
from the other side Trojans and Agyllines and Arcadians in painted
armour flood thickly in: so hath one passion seized all to make decision
by the sword. They pull the altars to pieces; through all the air goes a
thick storm of weapons, and faster falls the iron rain. Bowls and
hearth-fires are carried off; Latinus himself retreats, bearing the
outraged gods of the broken treaty. The others harness their chariots,
or vault upon their horses and come up with swords drawn. Messapus,
eager to shatter the treaty, rides menacingly down on Aulestes the
Tyrrhenian, a king in a king's array. Retreating hastily, and tripped on
the altars that meet him behind, the hapless man goes down on his head
and shoulders. But Messapus flies up with wrathful spear, and strikes
him, as he pleads sore, a deep downward [295-330] blow from horseback
with his beam-like spear, saying thus: That for him: the high gods take
this better victim. The Italians crowd in and strip his warm limbs.
Corynaeus seizes a charred brand from the altar, and meeting Ebysus as
he advances to strike, darts the flame in his face; his heavy beard
flamed up, and gave out a scorched smell. Following up his enemy's
confusion, the other seizes him with his left hand by the hair, and
bears him to earth with a thrust of his planted knee, and there drives
the unyielding sword into his side. Podalirius pursues and overhangs
with naked sword the shepherd Alsus as he rushes amid the foremost line
of weapons; Alsus swings back his axe, and severs brow and chin full in
front, wetting his armour all over with spattered blood. Grim rest and
iron slumber seal his eyes; his lids close on everlasting night.



But good Aeneas, his head bared, kept stretching his unarmed hand and
calling loudly to his men: 'Whither run you? What is this strife that so
spreads and swells? Ah, restrain your wrath! truce is already stricken,
and all its laws ordained; mine alone is the right of battle. Leave me
alone, and my hand shall confirm the treaty; these rites already make
Turnus mine.' Amid these accents, amid words like these, lo! a whistling
arrow winged its way to him, sped from what hand or driven by what god,
none knows, or what chance or deity brought such honour to the
Rutulians; the renown of the high deed was buried, nor did any boast to
have dealt Aeneas' wound. Turnus, when he saw Aeneas retreating from the
ranks and his captains in dismay, burns hot with sudden hope. At once he
calls for his horses and armour, and with a bound leaps proudly into his
chariot and handles the reins. He darts on, dealing many a brave man's
body to death; many an one he rolls half-slain, or crushes whole files
under his chariot, or seizes and showers spears on the fugitives. As
[331-364] when by the streams of icy Hebrus Mavors kindles to bloodshed
and clashes on his shield, and stirs war and speeds his furious
coursers; they outwing south winds and west on the open plain; utmost
Thrace groans under their hoof-beats; and around in the god's train rush
the faces of dark Terror, and Wraths and Ambushes; even so amid the
battle Turnus briskly lashes on his reeking horses, trampling on the
foes that lie piteously slain; the galloping hoof scatters bloody dew,
and spurns mingled gore and sand. And now hath he dealt Sthenelus to
death, and Thamyrus and Pholus, him and him at close quarters, the other
from afar; from afar both the sons of Imbrasus, Glaucus and Lades, whom
Imbrasus himself had nurtured in Lycia and equipped in equal arms,
whether to meet hand to hand or to outstrip the winds on horseback.
Elsewhere Eumedes advances amid the fray, ancient Dolon's brood,
illustrious in war, renewing his grandfather's name, his father's
courage and strength of hand, who of old dared to claim Pelides' chariot
as his price if he went to spy out the Grecian camp; to him the son of
Tydeus told out another price for his venture, and he dreams no more of
Achilles' horses. Him Turnus descried far on the open plain, and first
following him with light javelin through long space of air, stops his
double-harnessed horses and leaps from the chariot, and descends on his
fallen half-lifeless foe, and, planting his foot on his neck, wrests the
blade out of his hand and dyes its glitter deep in his throat, adding
these words withal: 'Behold, thou liest, Trojan, meting out those
Hesperian fields thou didst seek in war. Such guerdon is theirs who dare
to tempt my sword; thus do they found their city.' Then with a
spear-cast he sends Asbutes to follow him, and Chloreus and Sybaris,
Dares and Thersilochus, and Thymoetes fallen flung over his horse's
neck. And as when [365-398] the Edonian North wind's wrath roars on the
deep Aegean, and the wave follows it shoreward; where the blast comes
down, the clouds race over the sky; so, wheresoever Turnus cleaves his
way, columns retreat and lines turn and run; his own speed bears him on,
and his flying plume tosses as his chariot meets the breeze. Phegeus
brooked not his proud approach; he faced the chariot, and caught and
twisted away in his right hand the mouths of his horses, spurred into
speed and foaming on the bit. Dragged along and hanging by the yoke he
is left uncovered; the broad lance-head reaches him, pins and pierces
the double-woven breastplate, and lightly wounds the surface of his
body. Yet turning, he advanced on the enemy behind his shield, and
sought succour in the naked point; when the wheel running forward on its
swift axle struck him headlong and flung him to ground, and Turnus'
sword following it smote off his head between the helmet-rim and the
upper border of the breastplate, and left the body on the sand.



And while Turnus thus victoriously deals death over the plains,
Mnestheus meantime and faithful Achates, and Ascanius by their side, set
down Aeneas in the camp, dabbled with blood and leaning every other step
on his long spear. He storms, and tries hard to pull out the dart where
the reed had broken, and calls for the nearest way of remedy, to cut
open the wound with broad blade, and tear apart the weapon's
lurking-place, and so send him back to battle. And now Iapix son of
Iasus came, beloved beyond others of Phoebus, to whom once of old,
smitten with sharp desire, Apollo gladly offered his own arts and gifts,
augury and the lyre and swift arrows: he, to lengthen out the destiny of
a parent given over to die, chose rather to know the potency of herbs
and the practice of healing, and deal in a silent art unrenowned. Aeneas
stood chafing bitterly, propped on his vast spear, mourning
[399-435] Iülus and a great crowd of men around, unstirred by their
tears. The aged man, with garment drawn back and girt about him in
Paeonian fashion, makes many a hurried effort with healing hand and the
potent herbs of Phoebus, all in vain; in vain his hand solicits the
arrow-head, and his pincers' grasp pulls at the steel. Fortune leads him
forward in nowise; Apollo aids not with counsel; and more and more the
fierce clash swells over the plains, and the havoc draws nigher on.
Already they see the sky a mass of dust, the cavalry approaching, and
shafts falling thickly amid the camp; the dismal cry uprises of warriors
fighting and falling under the War-god's heavy hand. At this, stirred
deep by her son's cruel pain, Venus his mother plucked from Cretan Ida a
stalk of dittamy with downy leaves and bright-tressed flowers, the plant
not unknown to wild goats when winged arrows are fast in their body.
This Venus bore down, her shape girt in a dim halo; this she steeps with
secret healing in the river-water poured out and sparkling abrim, and
sprinkles life-giving juice of ambrosia and scented balm. With that
water aged Iapix washed the wound, unwitting; and suddenly, lo! all the
pain left his body, all the blood in the deep wound was stanched. And
now following his hand the arrow fell out with no force, and strength
returned afresh as of old. 'Hasten! arms for him quickly! why stand
you?' cries Iapix aloud, and begins to kindle their courage against the
enemy; 'this comes not by human resource or schooling of art, nor does
my hand save thee, Aeneas: a higher god is at work, and sends thee back
to higher deeds.' He, eager for battle, had already clasped on the
greaves of gold right and left, and scorning delay, brandishes his
spear. When the shield is adjusted by his side and the corslet on his
back, he clasps Ascanius in his armed embrace, and lightly kissing him
through the helmet, cries: 'Learn of me, O boy, valour [436-470] and
toil indeed, fortune of others. Now mine hand shall give thee defence in
war, and lead thee to great reward: do thou, when hereafter thine age
ripens to fulness, keep this in remembrance, and as thou recallest the
pattern of thy kindred, let thy spirit rise to thy father Aeneas, thine
uncle Hector.'



These words uttered, he issued towering from the gates, brandishing his
mighty spear: with him in serried column rush Antheus and Mnestheus, and
all the throng streams forth of the camp. The field drifts with blinding
dust, and the startled earth trembles under the tramp of feet. From his
earthworks opposite Turnus saw and the Ausonians saw them come, and an
icy shudder ran deep through their frame; first and before all the
Latins Juturna heard and knew the sound, and in terror fled away. He
flies on, and hurries his dark column over the open plain. As when in
fierce weather a storm-cloud moves over mid sea to land, with presaging
heart, ah me, the hapless husbandmen shudder from afar; it will deal
havoc to their trees and destruction to their crops, and make a broad
path of ruin; the winds fly before it, and bear its roar to the beach;
so the Rhoetean captain drives his army full on the foe; one and all
they close up in wedges, and mass their serried ranks. Thymbraeus smites
massive Osiris with the sword, Mnestheus slays Arcetius, Achates Epulo,
Gyas Ufens: Tolumnius the augur himself goes down, he who had hurled the
first weapon against the foe. Their cry rises to heaven, and in turn the
routed Rutulians give backward in flight over the dusty fields. Himself
he deigns not to cut down the fugitives, nor pursue such as meet him
fair on foot or approach in arms: Turnus alone he tracks and searches in
the thick haze, alone calls him to conflict. Then panic-stricken the
warrior maiden flings Turnus' charioteer out over his reins, and leaving
him far where he slips from the [471-504] chariot-pole, herself succeeds
and turns the wavy reins, tones and limbs and armour all of Metiscus'
wearing. As when a black swallow flits through some rich lord's spacious
house, and circles in flight the lofty halls, gathering her tiny food
for sustenance to her twittering nestlings, and now swoops down the
spacious colonnades, now round the wet ponds; in like wise dart
Juturna's horses amid the enemy, and her fleet chariot passes flying
over all the field. And now here and now here she displays her
triumphant brother, nor yet allows him to close, but flies far and away.
None the less does Aeneas thread the circling maze to meet him, and
tracks his man, and with loud cry cries on him through the scattered
ranks. Often as he cast eyes on his enemy and essayed to outrun the
speed of the flying-footed horses, so often Juturna wheeled her team
away. Alas, what can he do? Vainly he tosses on the ebb and flow, and in
his spirit diverse cares make conflicting call; when Messapus, who haply
bore in his left hand two tough spear-shafts topped with steel, runs
lightly up and aims and hurls one of them upon him with unerring stroke.
Aeneas stood still, and gathered himself behind his armour, sinking on
bended knee; yet the rushing spear bore off his helmet-spike, and dashed
the helmet-plume from the crest. Then indeed his wrath swells; and
forced to it by their treachery, while chariot and horses disappear, he
calls Jove oft and again to witness, and the altars of the violated
treaty, and now at last plunges amid their lines. Sweeping terrible down
the tide of battle he wakens fierce indiscriminate carnage, and flings
loose all the reins of wrath.



What god may now unfold for me in verse so many woes, so many diverse
slaughters and death of captains whom now Turnus, now again the Trojan
hero, drives over all the field? Was it well, O God, that nations
destined to everlasting peace should clash in so vast a shock? Aeneas
[505-540] meets Sucro the Rutulian; the combat stayed the first rush of
the Teucrians, but delayed them not long; he catches him on the side,
and, when fate comes quickest, drives the harsh sword clean through the
ribs where they fence the breast. Turnus brings down Amycus from
horseback with his brother Diores, and meets them on foot; him he
strikes with his long spear as he comes, him with his sword-point, and
hangs both severed heads on his chariot and carries them off dripping
with blood. The one sends to death Talos and Tanaïs and brave Cethegus,
three at one meeting, and gloomy Onites, of Echionian name, and Peridia
the mother that bore him; the other those brethren sent from Lycia and
Apollo's fields, and Menoetes the Arcadian, him who loathed warfare in
vain; who once had his art and humble home about the river-fisheries of
Lerna, and knew not the courts of the great, but his father was tenant
of the land he tilled. And as fires kindled dispersedly in a dry forest
and rustling laurel-thickets, or foaming rivers where they leap swift
and loud from high hills, and speed to sea each in his own path of
havoc; as fiercely the two, Aeneas and Turnus, dash amid the battle;
now, now wrath surges within them, and unconquerable hearts are torn;
now in all their might they rush upon wounds. The one dashes Murranus
down and stretches him on the soil with a vast whirling mass of rock, as
he cries the names of his fathers and forefathers of old, a whole line
drawn through Latin kings; under traces and yoke the wheels spurned him,
and the fast-beating hoofs of his rushing horses trample down their
forgotten lord. The other meets Hyllus rushing on in gigantic pride, and
hurls his weapon at his gold-bound temples; the spear pierced through
the helmet and stood fast in the brain. Neither did thy right hand save
thee from Turnus, O Cretheus, bravest of the Greeks; nor did his gods
shield Cupencus when Aeneas came; he gave his [541-575] breast full to
the steel, nor, alas! was the brazen shield's delay aught of avail. Thee
likewise, Aeolus, the Laurentine plains saw sink backward and cover a
wide space of earth; thou fallest, whom Argive battalions could not lay
low, nor Achilles the destroyer of Priam's realm. Here was thy goal of
death; thine high house was under Ida, at Lyrnesus thine high house, on
Laurentine soil thy tomb. The whole battle-lines gather up, all Latium
and all Dardania, Mnestheus and valiant Serestus, with Messapus, tamer
of horses, and brave Asilas, the Tuscan battalion and Evander's Arcadian
squadrons; man by man they struggle with all their might; no rest nor
pause in the vast strain of conflict.



At this Aeneas' mother most beautiful inspired him to advance on the
walls, directing his columns on the town and dismaying the Latins with
sudden and swift disaster. As in search for Turnus he bent his glance
this way and that round the separate ranks, he descries the city free
from all this warfare, unpunished and unstirred. Straightway he kindles
at the view of a greater battle; he summons Mnestheus and Sergestus and
brave Serestus his captains, and mounts a hillock; there the rest of the
Teucrian army gathers thickly, still grasping shield and spear. Standing
on the high mound amid them, he speaks: 'Be there no delay to my words;
Jupiter is with us; neither let any be slower to move that the design is
sudden. This city to-day, the source of war, the royal seat of Latinus,
unless they yield them to receive our yoke and obey their conquerors,
will I raze to ground, and lay her smoking roofs level with the dust.
Must I wait forsooth till Turnus please to stoop to combat, and choose
again to face his conqueror? This, O citizens, is the fountain-head and
crown of the accursed war. Bring brands speedily, and reclaim the treaty
in fire.' He ended; all with spirit alike emulous form a wedge and
advance in serried masses to the walls. Ladders are run [576-611] up,
and fire leaps sudden to sight. Some rush to the separate gates, and cut
down the guards of the entry, others hurl their steel and darken the sky
with weapons. Aeneas himself among the foremost, upstretching his hand
to the city walls, loudly reproaches Latinus, and takes the gods to
witness that he is again forced into battle, that twice now do the
Italians choose warfare and break a second treaty. Discord rises among
the alarmed citizens: some bid unbar the town and fling wide their gates
to the Dardanians, and pull the king himself towards the ramparts;
others bring arms and hasten to defend the walls: as when a shepherd
tracks bees to their retreat in a recessed rock, and fills it with
stinging smoke, they within run uneasily up and down their waxen
fortress, and hum louder in rising wrath; the smell rolls in darkness
along their dwelling, and a blind murmur echoes within the rock as the
smoke issues to the empty air.



This fortune likewise befell the despairing Latins, this woe shook the
whole city to her base. The queen espies from her roof the enemy's
approach, the walls scaled and firebrands flying on the houses; and
nowhere Rutulian ranks, none of Turnus' columns to meet them; alas! she
deems him destroyed in the shock of battle, and, distracted by sudden
anguish, shrieks that she is the source of guilt, the spring of ill, and
with many a mad utterance of frenzied grief rends her purple attire with
dying hand, and ties from a lofty beam the ghastly noose of death. And
when the unhappy Latin women knew this calamity, first her daughter
Lavinia tears her flower-like tresses and roseate cheeks, and all the
train around her madden in her suit; the wide palace echoes to their
wailing, and from it the sorrowful rumour spreads abroad throughout the
town. All hearts sink; Latinus goes with torn raiment, in dismay at his
wife's doom and his city's downfall, defiling his hoary hair with
soilure of sprinkled dust.




[614-648] Meanwhile on the skirts of the field Turnus chases scattered
stragglers, ever slacker to battle, ever less and less exultant in his
coursers' victorious speed. The confused cry came to him borne in blind
terror down the breeze, and his startled ears caught the echoing tumult
and disastrous murmur of the town. 'Ah me! what agony shakes the city?
or what is this cry that fleets so loud from the distant town?' So
speaks he, and distractedly checks the reins. And to him his sister, as
changed into his charioteer Metiscus' likeness she swayed horses and
chariot-reins, thus rejoined: 'This way, Turnus, let us pursue the brood
of Troy, where victory opens her nearest way; there are others whose
hands can protect their dwellings. Aeneas falls fiercer on the Italians,
and closes in conflict; let our hand too deal pitiless death on his
Teucrians. Neither in tale of dead nor in glory of battle shalt thou
retire outdone.' Thereat Turnus: . . .



'Ah my sister, long ere now I knew thee, when first thine arts shattered
the treaty, and thou didst mingle in the strife; and now thy godhead
conceals itself in vain. But who hath bidden thee descend from heaven to
bear this sore travail? was it that thou mightest see thy hapless
brother cruelly slain? for what do I, or what fortune yet gives promise
of safety? Before my very eyes, calling aloud on me, I saw Murranus,
than whom none other is left me more dear, sink huge to earth, borne
down by as huge a wound. Hapless Ufens is fallen, not to see our shame;
corpse and armour are in Teucrian hands. The destruction of their
households, this was the one thing yet lacking; shall I suffer it? Shall
my hand not refute Drances' jeers? shall I turn my back, and this land
see Turnus a fugitive? Is Death all so bitter? Do you, O Shades, be
gracious to me, since the powers of heaven are estranged; to you shall I
go down, a pure spirit and [649-681] ignorant of your blame, never once
unworthy of my mighty fathers of old.'



Scarce had he spoken thus; lo! Saces, borne flying on his foaming horse
through the thickest of the foe, an arrow-wound right in his face,
darts, beseeching Turnus by his name. 'Turnus, in thee is our last
safety; pity thy people. Aeneas thunders in arms, and threatens to
overthrow and hurl to destruction the high Italian fortress; and already
firebrands are flying on our roofs. On thee, on thee the Latins turn
their gazing eyes; King Latinus himself mutters in doubt, whom he is to
call his sons, to whom he shall incline in union. Moreover the queen,
thy surest stay, hath fallen by her own hand and in dismay fled the
light. Alone in front of the gates Messapus and valiant Atinas sustain
the battle-line. Round about them to right and left the armies stand
locked and the iron field shivers with naked points; thou wheelest thy
chariot on the sward alone.' At the distracting picture of his fortune
Turnus froze in horror and stood in dumb gaze; together in his heart
sweep the vast mingling tides of shame and maddened grief, and love
stung to frenzy and resolved valour. So soon as the darkness cleared and
light returned to his soul, he fiercely turned his blazing eyeballs
towards the ramparts, and gazed back from his wheels on the great city.
And lo! a spire of flame wreathing through the floors wavered up skyward
and held a turret fast, a turret that he himself had reared of mortised
planks and set on rollers and laid with high gangways. 'Now, O my
sister, now fate prevails: cease to hinder; let us follow where deity
and stern fortune call. I am resolved to face Aeneas, resolved to bear
what bitterness there is in death; nor shalt thou longer see me shamed,
sister of mine. Let me be mad, I pray thee, with this madness before the
end.' He spoke, and leapt swiftly from his chariot to the field, and
darting through weapons [682-718] and through enemies, leaves his
sorrowing sister, and bursts in rapid course amid their columns. And as
when a rock rushes headlong from some mountain peak, torn away by the
blast, or if the rushing rain washes it away, or the stealing years
loosen its ancient hold; the reckless mountain mass goes sheer and
impetuous, and leaps along the ground, hurling with it forests and herds
and men; thus through the scattering columns Turnus rushes to the city
walls, where the earth is wettest with bloodshed and the air sings with
spears; and beckons with his hand, and thus begins aloud: 'Forbear now,
O Rutulians, and you, Latins, stay your weapons. Whatsoever fortune is
left is mine: I singly must expiate the treaty for you all, and make
decision with the sword.' All drew aside and left him room.



But lord Aeneas, hearing Turnus' name, abandons the walls, abandons the
fortress height, and in exultant joy flings aside all hindrance, breaks
off all work, and clashes his armour terribly, vast as Athos, or as
Eryx, or as the lord of Apennine when he roars with his tossing ilex
woods and rears his snowy crest rejoicing into air. Now indeed Rutulians
and Trojans and all Italy turned in emulous gaze, and they who held the
high city, and they whose ram was battering the foundations of the wall,
and unarmed their shoulders. Latinus himself stands in amaze at the
mighty men, born in distant quarters of the world, met and making
decision with the sword. And they, in the empty level field that cleared
for them, darted swiftly forward, and hurling their spears from far,
close in battle shock with clangour of brazen shields. Earth utters a
moan; the sword-strokes fall thick and fast, chance and valour joining
in one. And as in broad Sila or high on Taburnus, when two bulls rush to
deadly battle forehead to forehead, the herdsmen retire in terror, all
the herd stands dumb in dismay, and the heifers murmur in doubt which
shall be [719-752] lord in the woodland, which all the cattle must
follow; they violently deal many a mutual wound, and gore with their
stubborn horns, bathing their necks and shoulders in abundant blood; all
the woodland moans back their bellowing: even thus Aeneas of Troy and
the Daunian hero rush together shield to shield; the mighty crash fills
the sky. Jupiter himself holds up the two scales in even balance, and
lays in them the different fates of both, trying which shall pay forfeit
of the strife, whose weight shall sink in death. Turnus darts out,
thinking it secure, and rises with his whole reach of body on his
uplifted sword; then strikes; Trojans and Latins cry out in excitement,
and both armies strain their gaze. But the treacherous sword shivers,
and in mid stroke deserts its eager lord. If flight aid him not now! He
flies swifter than the wind, when once he descries a strange hilt in his
weaponless hand. Rumour is that in his headlong hurry, when mounting
behind his yoked horses to begin the battle, he left his father's sword
behind and caught up his charioteer Metiscus' weapon; and that served
him long, while Teucrian stragglers turned their backs; when it met the
divine Vulcanian armour, the mortal blade like brittle ice snapped in
the stroke; the shards lie glittering upon the yellow sand. So in
distracted flight Turnus darts afar over the plain, and now this way and
now that crosses in wavering circles; for on all hands the Teucrians
locked him in crowded ring, and the dreary marsh on this side, on this
the steep city ramparts hem him in.



Therewith Aeneas pursues, though ever and anon his knees, disabled by
the arrow, hinder and stay his speed; and foot hard on foot presses
hotly on his hurrying enemy: as when a hunter courses with a fleet
barking hound some stag caught in a river-loop or girt by the
crimson-feathered toils, and he, in terror of the snares and the high
river-bank, [753-786] darts back and forward in a thousand ways; but the
keen Umbrian clings agape, and just catches at him, and as though he
caught him snaps his jaws while the baffled teeth close on vacancy. Then
indeed a cry goes up, and banks and pools answer round about, and all
the sky echoes the din. He, even as he flies, chides all his Rutulians,
calling each by name, and shrieks for the sword he knew. But Aeneas
denounces death and instant doom if one of them draw nigh, and doubles
their terror with threats of their city's destruction, and though
wounded presses on. Five circles they cover at full speed, and unwind as
many this way and that; for not light nor slight is the prize they seek,
but Turnus' very lifeblood is at issue. Here there haply had stood a
bitter-leaved wild olive, sacred to Faunus, a tree worshipped by
mariners of old; on it, when rescued from the waves, they were wont to
fix their gifts to the god of Laurentum and hang their votive raiment;
but the Teucrians, unregarding, had cleared away the sacred stem, that
they might meet on unimpeded lists. Here stood Aeneas' spear; hither
borne by its own speed it was held fast stuck in the tough root. The
Dardanian stooped over it, and would wrench away the steel, to follow
with the weapon him whom he could not catch in running. Then indeed
Turnus cries in frantic terror: 'Faunus, have pity, I beseech thee! and
thou, most gracious Earth, keep thy hold on the steel, as I ever have
kept your worship, and the Aeneadae again have polluted it in war.' He
spoke, and called the god to aid in vows that fell not fruitless. For
all Aeneas' strength, his long struggling and delay over the tough stem
availed not to unclose the hard grip of the wood. While he strains and
pulls hard, the Daunian goddess, changing once more into the charioteer
Metiscus' likeness, runs forward and passes her brother his sword. But
Venus, indignant that the [787-818] Nymph might be so bold, drew nigh
and wrenched away the spear where it stuck deep in the root. Erect in
fresh courage and arms, he with his faithful sword, he towering fierce
over his spear, they face one another panting in the battle shock.



Meanwhile the King of Heaven's omnipotence accosts Juno as she gazes on
the battle from a sunlit cloud. 'What yet shall be the end, O wife? what
remains at the last? Heaven claims Aeneas as his country's god, thou
thyself knowest and avowest to know, and fate lifts him to the stars.
With what device or in what hope hangest thou chill in cloudland? Was it
well that a deity should be sullied by a mortal's wound? or that the
lost sword—for what without thee could Juturna avail?—should be
restored to Turnus and swell the force of the vanquished? Forbear now, I
pray, and bend to our entreaties; let not the pain thus devour thee in
silence, and distress so often flood back on me from thy sweet lips. The
end is come. Thou hast had power to hunt the Trojans over land or wave,
to kindle accursed war, to put the house in mourning, and plunge the
bridal in grief: further attempt I forbid thee.' Thus Jupiter began:
thus the goddess, daughter of Saturn, returned with looks cast down:



'Even because this thy will, great Jupiter, is known to me for thine,
have I left, though loth, Turnus alone on earth; nor else wouldst thou
see me now, alone on this skyey seat, enduring good and bad; but girt in
flame I were standing by their very lines, and dragging the Teucrians
into the deadly battle. I counselled Juturna, I confess it, to succour
her hapless brother, and for his life's sake favoured a greater daring;
yet not the arrow-shot, not the bending of the bow, I swear by the
merciless well-head of the Stygian spring, the single ordained dread of
the gods in heaven. And now I retire, and leave the battle in loathing.
[819-854] This thing I beseech thee, that is bound by no fatal law, for
Latium and for the majesty of thy kindred. When now they shall plight
peace with prosperous marriages (be it so!), when now they shall join in
laws and treaties, bid thou not the native Latins change their name of
old, nor become Trojans and take the Teucrian name, or change their
language, or alter their attire: let Latium be, let Alban kings endure
through ages, let Italian valour be potent in the race of Rome. Troy is
fallen; let her and her name lie where they fell.'



To her smilingly the designer of men and things:



'Jove's own sister thou art, and second seed of Saturn, such surge of
wrath tosses within thy breast! But come, allay this madness so vainly
stirred. I give thee thy will, and yield thee ungrudged victory. Ausonia
shall keep her native speech and usage, and as her name is, it shall be.
The Trojans shall sink mingling into their blood; I will add their
sacred law and ritual, and make all Latins and of a single speech. Hence
shall spring a race of tempered Ausonian blood, whom thou shalt see
outdo men and gods in duty; nor shall any nation so observe thy
worship.' To this Juno assented, and in gladness withdrew her purpose;
meanwhile she quits her cloud, and retires out of the sky.



This done, the Father revolves inly another counsel, and prepares to
separate Juturna from her brother's arms. Twin monsters there are,
called the Dirae by their name, whom with infernal Megaera the dead of
night bore at one single birth, and wreathed them in like serpent coils,
and clothed them in windy wings. They appear at Jove's throne and in the
courts of the grim king, and quicken the terrors of wretched men
whensoever the lord of heaven deals sicknesses and dreadful death, or
sends terror of war upon guilty cities. One of these Jupiter sent
swiftly down from heaven's height, and bade her meet Juturna for a
[855-888] sign. She wings her way, and darts in a whirlwind to earth.
Even as an arrow through a cloud, darting from the string when Parthian
hath poisoned it with bitter gall, Parthian or Cydonian, and sped the
immedicable shaft, leaps through the swift shadow whistling and unknown;
so sprung and swept to earth the daughter of Night. When she espies the
Ilian ranks and Turnus' columns, suddenly shrinking to the shape of a
small bird that often sits late by night on tombs or ruinous roofs, and
vexes the darkness with her cry, in such change of likeness the monster
shrilly passes and repasses before Turnus' face, and her wings beat
restlessly on his shield. A strange numbing terror unnerves his limbs,
his hair thrills up, and the accents falter on his tongue. But when his
hapless sister knew afar the whistling wings of the Fury, Juturna
unbinds and tears her tresses, with rent face and smitten bosom. 'How, O
Turnus, can thine own sister help thee now? or what more is there if I
break not under this? What art of mine can lengthen out thy day? can I
contend with this ominous thing? Now, now I quit the field. Dismay not
my terrors, disastrous birds; I know these beating wings, and the sound
of death, nor do I miss high-hearted Jove's haughty ordinance. Is this
his repayment for my maidenhood? what good is his gift of life for ever?
why have I forfeited a mortal's lot? Now assuredly could I make all this
pain cease, and go with my unhappy brother side by side into the dark.
Alas mine immortality! will aught of mine be sweet to me without thee,
my brother? Ah, how may Earth yawn deep enough for me, and plunge my
godhead in the under world!'



So spoke she, and wrapping her head in her gray vesture, the goddess
moaning sore sank in the river depth.



But Aeneas presses on, brandishing his vast tree-like spear, and
fiercely speaks thus: 'What more delay is there [889-924] now? or why,
Turnus, dost thou yet shrink away? Not in speed of foot, in grim arms,
hand to hand, must be the conflict. Transform thyself as thou wilt, and
collect what strength of courage or skill is thine; pray that thou
mayest wing thy flight to the stars on high, or that sheltering earth
may shut thee in.' The other, shaking his head: 'Thy fierce words dismay
me not, insolent! the gods dismay me, and Jupiter's enmity.' And no more
said, his eyes light on a vast stone, a stone ancient and vast that
haply lay upon the plain, set for a landmark to divide contested fields:
scarcely might twelve chosen men lift it on their shoulders, of such
frame as now earth brings to birth: then the hero caught it up with
trembling hand and whirled it at the foe, rising higher and quickening
his speed. But he knows not his own self running nor going nor lifting
his hands or moving the mighty stone; his knees totter, his blood
freezes cold; the very stone he hurls, spinning through the empty void,
neither wholly reached its distance nor carried its blow home. And as in
sleep, when nightly rest weighs down our languorous eyes, we seem vainly
to will to run eagerly on, and sink faint amidst our struggles; the
tongue is powerless, the familiar strength fails the body, nor will
words or utterance follow: so the disastrous goddess brings to naught
all Turnus' valour as he presses on. His heart wavers in shifting
emotion; he gazes on his Rutulians and on the city, and falters in
terror, and shudders at the imminent spear; neither sees he whither he
may escape nor how rush violently on the enemy, and nowhere his chariot
or his sister at the reins. As he wavers Aeneas poises the deadly
weapon, and, marking his chance, hurls it in from afar with all his
strength of body. Never with such a roar are stones hurled from some
engine on ramparts, nor does the thunder burst in so loud a peal.
Carrying grim death with it, the spear flies in fashion of some dark
whirlwind, and [925-952] opens the rim of the corslet and the utmost
circles of the sevenfold shield. Right through the thigh it passes
hurtling on; under the blow Turnus falls huge to earth with his leg
doubled under him. The Rutulians start up with a groan, and all the hill
echoes round about, and the width of high woodland returns their cry.
Lifting up beseechingly his humbled eyes and suppliant hand: 'I have
deserved it,' he says, 'nor do I ask for mercy; use thy fortune. If an
unhappy parent's distress may at all touch thee, this I pray; even such
a father was Anchises to thee; pity Daunus' old age, and restore to my
kindred which thou wilt, me or my body bereft of day. Thou art
conqueror, and Ausonia hath seen me stretch conquered hands. Lavinia is
thine in marriage; press not thy hatred farther.'



Aeneas stood wrathful in arms, with rolling eyes, and lowered his hand;
and now and now yet more the speech began to bend him to waver: when
high on his shoulder appeared the sword-belt with the shining bosses
that he knew, the luckless belt of the boy Pallas, whom Turnus had
struck down with mastering wound, and wore on his shoulders the fatal
ornament. The other, as his eyes drank in the plundered record of his
fierce grief, kindles to fury, and cries terrible in anger: 'Mayest
thou, thou clad in the spoils of my dearest, escape mine hands? Pallas
it is, Pallas who now strikes the sacrifice, and exacts vengeance in thy
guilty blood.' So saying, he fiercely plunges the steel full in his
breast. But his limbs grow slack and chill, and the life with a moan
flies indignantly into the dark.



THE END.







NOTES 


Book First



l. 123— Accipiunt inimicum imbrem. Inimica non tantum hostilia sed
perniciosa.—Serv. on ix. 315. The word often has this latter sense in
Virgil.



l. 396— Aut capere aut captas iam despectare videntur. Henry seems
unquestionably right in explaining captas despectare of the swans
rising and hovering over the place where they had settled, this action
being more fully expressed in the next two lines. The parallelism
between ll. 396 and 400 exists, but it is inverted, capere 
corresponding to subit , captas despectare to tenet .



l. 427— lata theatris with the balance of MS. authority.



l. 550— Arvaque after Med. and Pal.; armaque Con.



l. 636— Munera laetitiamque die ('ut multi legunt,' says Serv.),
though it has little MS. authority, has been adopted because it is
strongly probable on internal grounds, as giving a basis for the other
two readings, dei and dii .



l. 722— The long-since-unstirred spirit.




And weep afresh love's long-since-cancell'd woe.

Shakespeare , Sonnet XXX.



l. 726— dependent lychni laquearibus aureis. Serv. on viii. 25,
summique ferit laquearia tecti , says 'multi lacuaria legunt. nam lacus
dicuntur: unde est . . . lacunar. non enim a laqueis dicitur.' As Prof.
Nettleship has pointed out, this seems to indicate that there are two
words, laquear from laqueus , meaning chain or network, and lacuar 
or lacunar from lacus , meaning sunk work.




Book Second



l. 30— Classibus hic locus. Ad equites referre debemus.—Serv. Cf.
also vii. 716.



l. 76—Omitted with the best MSS.



l. 234— moenia pandimus urbis. Moenia cetera urbis tecta vel aedes
accipiendum.—Serv. This is the sense which the word generally has in
Virgil: it is often used in contrast with muri , or as a synonym of
urbs ; and in most cases city is its nearest English equivalent.



l. 381— caerula colla tumentem. Caerulum est viride cum nigro.—Serv.
on vii. 198. Cf. iii. 208, where it is used of the colour of the sea
after a storm.



l. 616— nimbo effulgens. est fulgidum lumen quo deorum capita
cinguntur. sic etiam pingi solet.—Serv. Cf. xii. 416.




Book Third



l. 127— freta concita terris with all the best MSS.; consita Con.



l. 152— qua se Plena per insertas fundebat Luna fenestras. The usual
explanation, which makes insertas an epithet transferred by a sort of
hypallage from Luna to fenestras , is extremely violent, and makes
the word little more than a repetition of se fundebat . Servius
mentions two other interpretations; non seratas, quasi inseratas , and
clatratas ; the last has been adopted in the translation.



In the passage of Lucretius (ii. 114) which Virgil has imitated here,




Contemplator enim cum solis lumina . . .

Inserti fundunt radii per opaca domorum,



it is possible that clatris may be the lost word.



l. 684—




Contra iussa monent Heleni, Scyllam atque Charybdim

Inter, utramque viam leti discrimine parvo

Ni teneant cursus.



In this difficult passage it is probably best to take cursus as the
subject to teneant ( cursus teneant , id est agantur.—Serv. Cf. also l.
454 above, quamvis vi cursus in altum Vela vocet ), viam being either
the direct object of teneant , or in loose apposition to Scyllam atque
Charybdim .




l. 708— tempestatibus actis with Rom. and Pal.; actus Con. after
Med.




Book Fourth



Totus hic liber . . . in consiliis et subtilitatibus est. nam
paene comicus stilus est. nec mirum, ubi de amore
tractatur.—Serv.



l. 273—Omitted with the best MSS.



l. 528—Omitted with the best MSS.




Book Fifth



l. 595— iuduntque per undas , omitted with the preponderance of MS.
authority.




Book Sixth



l. 242—Omitted with the balance of MS. authority.



l. 806— virtutem extendere factis with Med.; virtute extendere vires 
Con.




Book Eighth



l. 46—Omitted with the majority of the best MSS.



l. 383— Arma rogo. Genetrix nato te filia Nerei .



Arma rogo. hic distinguendum, ut cui petat non dicat, sed
relinquat intellegi . . . Genetrix nato te filia Nerei. hoc
est, soles hoc praestare matribus.—Serv.




Book Ninth



l. 29—Omitted with all the best MSS.



l. 122—Omitted with all the best MSS.



l. 281—




Me nulla dies tam fortibus ausis

Dissimilem arguerit tantum, Fortuna secunda

Aut adversa cadat.



With some hesitation I have adopted this reading as the one open to
least objection, though the balance of authority is decidedly in favour
of haud adversa . For the position of tantum cf. Ecl. x. 46,
according to the 'subtilior explicatio' now generally adopted.




l. 412—




Et venit adversi in tergum Sulmonis ibique

Frangitur, et fisso transit praecordia ligno.



The phrase in tergum occurs twice elsewhere: ix. 764—meaning 'on the
back'; and xi. 653—meaning 'backward'; and in x. 718 the uncertainty
about the order of the lines makes it possible that tergo decutit
hastas was meant to refer to the boar, not to Mezentius. But the
passages quoted by the editors there shew that the word might be used in
the sense of 'shield'; and this being so we are scarcely justified in
reading aversi against all the good MSS.



l. 529—Omitted with most MSS.




Book Tenth



l. 278—Omitted with the best MSS.



l. 754— Insidiis, iaculo et longe fallente sagitta. The MS. authority
is decidedly in favour of this, the more difficult reading; and the
hendiadys is not more violent than those in Georg. ii. 192, Aen. iii.
223.




Book Twelfth



l. 218— Tum magis, ut propius cernunt non viribus aequis.



With Ribbeck I believe that there is a gap in the sense here, and have
marked one in the translation.



l. 520— Limina with Med. Munera Con.



ll. 612, 613—Omitted with the best MSS.



l. 751— Venator cursu canis et latratibus instat. I take cursu canis 
as equivalent to currente cane , as in i. 324, spumantis apri cursum
clamore prementem .




Printed by R. & R. Clark , Edinburgh .








TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES 


Transcriber added the Table of Contents.



The following words appear with and without a hyphen. Spelling has been
left as in the original.





blood-stained 
bloodstained 


hill-tops 
hilltops 


horse-hair 
horsehair 


life-blood 
lifeblood 


new-born 
newborn 


spear-shaft 
spearshaft 


water-ways 
waterways 



The following words are spelled in multiple ways. Spelling has been left
as in the original.





aery 
aëry 


horned 
hornèd 


Nereids 
Nereïd 


Pergama 
Pergamea 



The following corrections have made to the text:



page 173—'[quotation mark missing in original]Nymphs,
Laurentine Nymphs



page 202—in name fail to be Creüsa[original has Crëusa]



page 207—Rumour on fluttering[original has flutttering] wings



page 285—the Rhoetean[original has Rhoeteian] captain drives
his army



The first occurrence of Phoebus was rendered with an oe ligature in the
original.



Ellipses match the original.



Page 300 is blank in the original.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AENEID *** 



Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.



Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK 



To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.



Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.



1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.



1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.



1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.



1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:



1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org . If you
are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this eBook.




1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.



1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.



1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.



1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.



1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.



1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:




• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation.”



• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
works.



• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.



• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.




1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.



1.F.



1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.



1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.



1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.



1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.



1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.



1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.



Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™



Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.



Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.



The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact



Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation



Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.



The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate .



While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.



International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.



Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate



Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works



Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.



Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.



Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org .



This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
